<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//W3C//DTD XHTML 1.0 Transitional//EN" "http://www.w3.org/TR/xhtml1/DTD/xhtml1-transitional.dtd">
<html xmlns="http://www.w3.org/1999/xhtml" dir="ltr"><head>
    <meta http-equiv="Content-Type" content="text/html; charset=UTF-8">
    
    <title>SigMech</title>
    
    <meta name="generator" content="..."> 
    
    <link rel="stylesheet" href="SigMech_files/style.css" type="text/css" media="screen">
  </head>
  <body>
    <div id="box">
      <div id="" class="pagesection">
	<img id="me" src="SigMech_files/CompetitiveInhibitor-OneStep.jpg">
	 
	<div class="sectbody">
	  <p><span id="name">SigMech</span> <br><br>
      &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; <a href="http://www.igb.uci.edu/component/content/article/26-sb/35-kmech.html">kMech</a>
 [Yang 2005] is an enzyme mechanism modeling tool  designed for the 
mathematical modeling of enzymes.&nbsp; It comprises a collection of 
single and  multiple substrate enzyme reactions.&nbsp;  Over the years 
the library of requested enzymatic reactions implemented  in the kMech 
utility and correspondingly in Sigmoid has grown substantially.&nbsp;</p>
	  <p>	          &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; A new generalized 
version of the kMech enzyme  mechanism modeling tool has been 
developed.&nbsp;  With this utility, SigMech, the approximately 35 
existing enzyme  mechanism models expressed explicitly in the 
kMech/Sigmoid platform can be  expressed implicitly by a single 
parameterized input notation. Subsequent  sub-reactions can be generated
 procedurally, and any potential “new” kMech  enzyme mechanisms that 
fall within the pattern abstracted from previous motifs need  not be 
created explicitly.&nbsp; </p>
	  <p>     &nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; The highly parameterized
 reaction types of SigMech,  together with the kMechReaction classes in 
the Sigmoid schema, provide a parameterized representation  that 
encompasses all previous Compound reactions that were present in the 
Sigmoid  schema, and can generate these and other novel reaction 
mechanisms from the  cross product of the valid SigMech input 
parameters.&nbsp; This development effectively renders kMech  
integration a solved problem within the scope of previous reaction 
motifs, and  will vastly reduce the need for frequent updates of the 
Sigmoid schema, database,  middleware translation and GUI.&nbsp; </p>
	  <p>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp; SigMech  combines the 
reaction motifs of previous kMech reaction mechanisms, with the  
conversion phase that was implemented in the three-stage xCellerator 
reaction  (ThreeStageCatalytic in the Sigmoid schema) yielding a greater
 parameter space  of possible enzymatic reaction mechanisms that can be 
generated on the fly  inside SME, and that can consequently be simulated
 by Mathematica/ xCellerator.</p>
    </div>
      </div>
      <div id="research" class="pagesection">
        <div class="sectbody">
	      <p>SigMech integrated with the Sigmoid Model Explorer can be found <a href="http://computableplant.ics.uci.edu/%7Ecompanib/SigMech/">here</a> as a Java .jar executable.<br>
        </p></div>
      </div>
    </div>
  

</body></html>