<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML 2.0//EN">
<HEAD>
<TITLE>Orality and Hypertext: An Interview with Ted Nelson</TITLE>
<LINK REL="Author" TITLE="Jim's Home Page" HREF="http://www.ics.uci.edu/~ejw/">
</HEAD>

<P><H1>Orality and Hypertext: An Interview with Ted Nelson</H1></P>

<P><I><A HREF="http://www.ics.uci.edu/~ejw/">Jim Whitehead</a></I></P>

<P>Early last June we received a gripping email, originally from Ted
Nelson, forwarded via a friend, concerning an article in Wired
magazine.  Our copy of Wired still lay unread in our growing "read
sometime" pile, though we had noticed the article on Xanadu, Nelson's
hypertext project.  The email left us reeling:</P>

<BLOCKQUOTE>
The June issue of WIRED magazine contains an extremely nasty  and
mean-spirited article entitled "The Curse of Xanadu,"  by Gary Wolf, which
purports to be the obituary of Project Xanadu.   

The article is an affront to the alumni and veterans of the Xanadu project,
some fifty of us over the years, contriving to make our endeavors look
impossible and asinine ...
</BLOCKQUOTE>

<P>Some background will help put this message in perspective.  While most
folks credit Vannevar Bush with the first description of
hypertext-like capability in an article titled, "As We May Think,"
published in 1945, the system he described (which he called Memex) was
based on microfilm.  In 1960, Ted Nelson invented computer-based
hypertext for a term project while a graduate student at Harvard, and
thereafter became increasingly consumed with his vision of global
hypertext, which he called the Xanadu system.  He coined the term
"hypertext" and presented a paper on "zippered lists," a key algorithm
in his Xanadu system, at a national conference of the Association for
Computing Machinery in 1965.</P>

<P>Given the dramatic growth of the World Wide Web (which still lacks
many key features of the Xanadu system), you would think that Nelson
would be accorded the same respect as other scientists and engineers
whose work has dramatically entered our lives.  However, due to early
high expectations placed onto the Xanadu project, combined with a
series of wrenchingly tragic setbacks, the Xanadu system is still
struggling to reach market, decades after its conception.</P>

<P>Even though Nelson is not one to mince words, the intensity of his
email message still took us by surprise.  Digging out our Wired, we
read through the offending article, and had to agree: the article is
indeed a carefully crafted slam of Nelson and Xanadu (the article can
be accessed via the WWW at
<A HREF="http://www.hotwired.com/wired/3.06/features/xanadu.html">
http://www.hotwired.com/wired/3.06/features/xanadu.html</a>).
Feeling that the mission of KUCI is to give marginalized voices a powerful
outlet, we approached Nelson about appearing on the Cyberspace Report.
A mere week after receiving his stunning email, Ted Nelson was our
featured guest.  Here are some excerpts from the interview.</P>

<P><B>Cyberspace Report:</B> What inspiration led you to develop hypertext?</P>

<P><B>Ted Nelson:</B> Well I was always, as a kid, into writing and reading
and literature and movies basically, like a lot of people, and I had
done a great deal of writing as a youth, and re-writing, and the
intricacy of taking ideas and sentences and trying to arrange them
into coherent, sensible, structures of thought struck me as a
particularly intricate and complex task, and I particularly minded
having to take thoughts which were not intrinsically sequential and
somehow put them in a row because print as it appears on the paper, or
in handwriting, is sequential.  There was always something wrong with
that because you were trying to take these thoughts which had a
structure, shall we say, a spatial structure all their own, and put
them into linear form.  Then the reader had to take this linear
structure and recompose his or her picture of the overall content,
once again placed in this nonsequential structure.  You had two it
seemed -- and now I'm reconstructing because I don't know how
explicitly I thought this out as a youth -- you had to take these two
additional steps of deconstructing some thoughts into linear sequence,
and then reconstructing them.  Why couldn't that all be bypassed by
having a nonsequential structure of thought which you presented
directly?  That was the hypothesis -- well the hyperthesis really --
of hypertext, that you could save both the writer's time and the
reader's time and effort in putting together and understanding what
was being presented.</P>

<P><B>CR:</B> What was your inspiration for the Xanadu system itself?</P>

<P><B>TN:</B> Well basically Xanadu has always been coextensive with my whole
paradigm -- I gave a talk on this last night at Xerox PARC -- which
was that you want to be able to keep track of your own creative output
being able to see the differences between my own versions and say, gee
if I move this from the beginning to the middle, and lets try it that
way, but then try moving the middle to the beginning in another
version, how does it come out each way?  So on the one hand, you want
as a writer or creative constructor of anything, those tools which
will most contribute to your understanding of the consequences of your
own design decisions.  On the other hand, for a new publishing system
of the future, and it seemed manifest to me in 1960 that we would be
reading and writing on computer screens that were interactive and all
this would be fed by a vast feeder network of digital digitalia around
the world, since we're going to be publishing in a system of this
kind, what would be the reward structure, what would be the document
structure, and what would be the most beneficial extension of
literature as we knew it.  To me literature is the great ideal here,
not some engineer's notion of information retrieval.  The engineers
seem to have the notion that you can take the documents that are
written and dip them in some sort of technical acid and the facts will
fall to the bottom and then these facts will roll into their
appropriate slots.  This is not so.  Writing is the way it is because
every word generally has some kind of meaning.  It's finding these
meanings and making them most useful to me that seems the great
problem.  So the issue is what will be the extension of literature
into the great realm of interactive, multi-dimensional, many-threaded
presentational forms.  So Xanadu basically has been my name for an
evolving but essentially centrally the same system for the supply and
presentation of material with two basic relationships: what we would
call the link, which is an unchanging connection between objects, or
parts which are different, and the transclusion, which is a maintained
connection between parts which are the same.</P>

<P><B>CR:</B> It sounds like the Xanadu system, many many years ago
solved a lot of the really pertinent problems that are just only
starting to surface in the World Wide Web today.  But yet the WWW has
managed to become by now the dominant hypertext paradigm.  For the
vast majority of people in the United States right now when you say
hypertext they think of Netscape or Mosaic and that is their notion of
hypertext.  Now that the WWW is so dominant, how does Xanadu have to
change, to modify itself to fit into the new reality of a WWW world?</P>

<P><B>TN:</B> That's a good question, I'm still muddling with it.
First of all, I think the WWW was a brilliant simplification.  As I
understand it, and maybe I have this wrong, but Tim Berners-Lee came
and we had lunch, in, oh I guess it was 1989, 90, something like that,
in Sausalito, and I really liked the guy, and he'd done this very
simple thing, and it sounded too trivial to me {laughs} but he
certainly was a nice fellow and I expected to keep in touch with him,
although I am a very bad correspondent, and the next thing I knew
suddenly the thing had caught on.  And what it turns out to be is
simply an extension of file transfer protocol, in other words it's
saying you can anonymously go in and dip in and take out this file and
here is a proposed way to look at it.  This is called HTML.  You have
to undestand the HTML/SGML kind of format where you've got all these
warty little knobs and boogers in it that are formatting codes -- this
is absolutely contrary to the Xanadu idea that you have clean data
undefiled.  However, it works, it's very simple, and you can always
take those things out, so that's OK.  But all it is is FTP with
lipstick so that you can look at these things and the jump addresses
are hidden and the formats and you have paragraph levels and stuff and
it's basically what people needed and frankly I think it's much better
than word processing.  I'm really happy now that I'm planning to
switch from Microsoft Word to HTML just because there's no need not
to.  It's a perfectly good format, and it makes everything simpler to
browse in.</P>

<P><B>CR:</B> You've obviously been at one point a visionary...</P>

<P><B>TN:</B> At one point?  When did that end? </P>

<P><B>CR:</B> Even now with the WWW your ideas are taking on sort of a
new reality in some way shape and form...</P>

<P><B>TN:</B> Or seemingly more real to some people.</P>

<P><B>CR:</B> If some people who have what seem like visionary ideas
right now, how would you encourage them to go about turning them into
reality based on your own experiences?</P>

<P><B>TN:</B> What would I recommend to a young visionary today?
{laughter} Very straightforward, learn to deal with short term goals
and not delegate. I trusted them {laughter} famous last words.  These
are people I still love and respect, but if I had been able to hold it
together and {pause} not try to overstretch and overgrab and managed
short term goals better, things would have been very different.  But
again I took a big goal as a single unit and then I turned it over to
others who took it as a single unit and made it a bigger goal and thus
postponed dealing with a well-defined situation.</P>

<P><B>CR:</B> Well, certainly the Xanadu system has had sort of a
checkered, and some would say, tragic history...</P>

<P><B>TN:</B> Well I would agree with the tragic, but the past tense I
don't agree with.  We're having a meeting right now as to how best to
put the system on the web because it's still working better than it
was in 1992, and as far as I know it can be finished.</P>

<P><B>CR:</B> There was a recent article in Wired magazine which took
a very critical view of the whole Xanadu project to date.  I know I've
received email from you where you were saying that you thought the
article was almost libelous...</P>

<P><B>TN:</B> Not almost, definitely. </P>

<P><B>CR:</B> OK, definitely libelous.  Would you care to comment
about your objections to the Wired article, which many of our
listeners probably have access to? </P>

<P><B>TN:</B> Sure.  Well it comes down to a great deal to personal
viewpoint and personal integrity.  People see the world differently
and the reporter, whose name is Gary Wolf, makes his biases extremely
clear in the article, but they were by no means clear when he so
charmingly inveigled his way into my confidence.  Now of course I've
generally taken the point of view that posterity would like what I did
and so I've trusted journalists as sort of ambassadors from posterity
and this has been a mistake in general but, ahem, Mr. Wolf did not
make his biases in any way evident when we saw each other.  It turns
out that the three things he most dislikes as far as I can tell are
idealism, untidyness, and immodesty, all three of which he found in
profusion in the Xanadu project.  For myself, I have always hated
things in people, well the people who I've regarded as shallow,
conventional, pompous, and smug.  So each of us hit the jackpot in the
other.  But as I say, he got to strike first, in this extremely
scurrilous and nasty piece. </P>

<P>He emailed me recently saying, gee I seem to have overlooked all the
positive statements, which is interesting because in my eight or so
readings of the article I did not find one positive statement which
was not immediately taken back by sarcasm or innuendo.  What I object
to as actually libelous in the piece of course has nothing to do --
well of course it has something to do with it -- but is not directly a
matter of its tone or its nastyness.  Libel consists of damaging,
false statements which are being promulgated either maliciously or
negligently.  Now as a reporter your standards for negligence may be
rather slippery but this man had definite access to a great deal of
information and I believe he was extremely, shall we say, disingenuous
in the use of that information and how he passed it on.  For example
he very amusingly talks about us as if we are blundering hobbyists and
says that computer scientists would not have agreed with us, therefore
according to Wolf we were not computer scientists, right.  He says of
Roger Gregory, my good friend whom he impugned and was much nastier to
than me, he says Roger Gregory was not an elite researcher or computer
scientist.  Yet a few paragraphs later he mentions that Roger had
developed a new addressing scheme based on transfinite arithmetic.
Now I do not know what Mr. Wolf means by computer science, but within
my world, someone who invents an addressing scheme based on
transfinite arithmetic is not stamp collecting. That's computer
science, or it was that week, and this is serious stuff.  By elite
researcher I suppose he means "annointed researcher" such having PhD's
or working at Xerox PARC or being licensed to kiss the feet of
so-and-so.  But we basically, on our own, were doing important, strong
work at the forefront and Mr. Wolf has made a point of trashing us and
ignoring any indication we were not a bunch of deranged hobbyists.
For example, he does not mention the contributions of Eric Drexler to
the team precisely, I think, because eveyone agrees that Eric Drexler
is a scientist, and therefore obviously doesn't fit into Mr. Wolf's
thesis.</P>

<P><B>CR:</B> Do you have any final, last words for our audience? </P>

<P><B>TN:</B> No, but just thank you very much for listening Orange 
County, and I'm with you in spirit and good luck with the bonds. </P>

<P>A complete, digital copy of this interview can be accessed from the
<A HREF="http://www.ics.uci.edu/~ejw/csr/cyber.html">
Cyberspace Report WWW page</a>.</P>

<P>Copyright &copy 1996, Jim Whitehead</P>