<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">
<html>

<head>
<meta http-equiv="Content-Type"
content="text/html; charset=iso-8859-1">
<meta name="GENERATOR" content="Microsoft FrontPage 2.0">
<title></title>
<!-- This document was created from RTF source by rtftohtml version
2.7.2 -->
</head>

<body bgcolor="#FFFFFF" text="#000000" link="#004D1A"
vlink="#004D1A" alink="#C0C0C0">

<p align="right"><em>Back to mceagle.com </em><a
href="http://www.mceagle.com/remote-viewing/refs/"><em>References</em></a><em>&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;&nbsp;</em></p>

<p><em>This document, for over two years, was hosted on the
University of Oregon web server. In Autumn of 1998 it was no
longer available through that source. This paper is part of a
group of papers, all related to the same very public and very
controversial report. It would be a form of bias to make the
other papers available when this one is not. Since this document
is no longer available via link from Dr. Hyman's university, we
are providing a locally-hosted copy for review. -- Webmaster</em></p>

<hr>

<p><b>Evaluation of Program on Anomalous Mental Phenomena </b></p>

<p>Ray Hyman</p>

<p>University of Oregon</p>

<p>Eugene, Oregon</p>

<p>September 11, 1995</p>

<p>INTRODUCTION</p>

<p>Professor Jessica Utts and I were given the task of evaluating
the program on &quot;Anomalous Mental Phenomena&quot; carried out
at SRI International (formerly the Stanford Research Institute)
from 1973 through 1989 and continued at SAIC (Science
Applications International Corporation) from 1992 through 1994.
We were asked to evaluate this research in terms of its
scientific value. We were also asked to comment on its potential
utility for intelligence applications.</p>

<p>The investigators use the term Anomalous Mental Phenomena to
refer to what the parapsychologists label as <i>psi. Psi </i>includes
both extrasensory perception (called <i>Anomalous Cognition</i>
by the present investigators) and psychokinesis (called <i>Anomalous
Perturbation</i> by the present investigators). The experimenters
claim that their results support the existence of Anomalous
Cognition--especially clairvoyance (information transmission from
a target without the intervention of a human sender) and
precognition. They found no evidence for the existence of
Anomalous Perturbation.</p>

<p>Our evaluation will focus on the 10 experiments conducted at
SAIC. These are the most recent in the program as well as the
only ones for which we have adequate documentation. The earlier
SRI research on remote viewing suffered from methodological
inadequacies. Another reason for concentrating upon this more
recent set of experiments is the limited time frame allotted for
this evaluation.</p>

<p>I will not ignore entirely the earlier SRI research. I will
also consider some of the contemporary research in parapsychology
at other laboratories. This is because a proper scientific
evaluation of any research program has to place it in the context
of the broader scientific community. In addition, some of this
contemporary research was subcontracted by the SAIC
investigators.</p>

<p>Professor Utts has provided an historical overview of the SRI
and SAIC programs as well as descriptions of the experiments
under consideration. I will not duplicate what she has written on
these topics. Instead, I will focus on her conclusions that:</p>

<p><i>Using the standards applied to any other area of science,
it is concluded that psychic functioning has been well
established. </i>[Utts, Sept. 1995, p 1]</p>

<p><i>Arguments that these results could be due to methodological
flaws in the experiments are soundly refuted. Effects of similar
magnitude to those found in government-sponsored research at SRI
and SAIC have been replicated at a number of laboratories across
the world. Such consistency cannot be readily explained by claims
of flaws or fraud. </i>[Utts, Sept. 1995, p 1]</p>

<p>Because my report will emphasize points of disagreement
between Professor Utts and me, I want to state that we agree on
many other points. We both agree that the SAIC experiments were
free of the methodological weaknesses that plagued the early SRI
research. We also agree that the SAIC experiments appear to be
free of the more obvious and better known flaws that can
invalidate the results of parapsychological investigations. We
agree that the effect sizes reported in the SAIC experiments are
too large and consistent to be dismissed as statistical flukes. </p>

<p>I also believe that Jessica Utts and I agree on what the next
steps should be.</p>

<p>We disagree on key questions such as:</p>

<p>1. Do these apparently non-chance effects justify concluding
that the existence of anomalous cognition has been established?</p>

<p>2. Has the possibility of methodological flaws been completely
eliminated?</p>

<p>3. Are the SAIC results consistent with the contemporary
findings in other parapsychological laboratories on remote
viewing and the ganzfeld phenomenon?</p>

<p>The remainder of this report will try to justify why I believe
the answer to these three questions is &quot;no.&quot;</p>

<p>SCIENTIFIC STATUS OF THE PROGRAM</p>

<p>Science is basically a <i>communal</i> activity. For any
developed field of inquiry, a community of experts exist. This
community provides the <i>disciplinary matrix</i> which
determines what questions are worth asking, which issues are
relevant, what variables matter and which can be safely ignored,
and the criteria for judging the adequacy of observational data.
The community provides checks and balances through the referee
system, open criticism, and independent replications. Only those
relationships that are reasonably lawful and replicable across
independent laboratories become part of the shared scientific
store of &quot;knowledge.&quot;</p>

<p>An individual investigator or laboratory can contribute to
this store. However, by itself, the output of a single
investigator or laboratory does not constitute science. No matter
how careful and competent the research, the findings of a single
laboratory count for nothing unless they can be reliably
replicated in other laboratories. This rule is true of ordinary
claims. It holds true especially for claims that add something
new or novel to the existing database. When an investigator, for
example, announces the discovery of a new element, the claim is
not accepted until the finding has been successfully replicated
by several independent laboratories. Of course, this rule is
enforced even more when the claim has revolutionary implications
that challenge the fundamental principles underlying most
sciences.</p>

<p>GENERAL SCIENTIFIC HANDICAPS OF THE SAIC PROGRAM</p>

<p>The brief characterization of scientific inquiry in the
preceding section alerts us to serious problems in trying to
assess the scientific status of the SAIC research. The secrecy
under which the SRI and SAIC programs was conducted necessarily
cut them off from the communal aspects of scientific inquiry. The
checks and balances that come from being an open part of the
disciplinary matrix were absent. With the exception of the past
year or so, none of the reports went through the all-important
peer-review system. Worse, promising findings did not have the
opportunity of being replicated in other laboratories.</p>

<p>The commendable improvements in protocols, methodology, and
data-gathering have not profited from the general shake-down and
debugging that comes mainly from other laboratories trying to use
the same improvements. Although the research program that started
in 1973 continued for over twenty years, the secrecy and other
constraints have produced only ten adequate experiments for
consideration. Unfortunately, ten experiments--especially from
one laboratory (considering the SAIC program as a continuation of
the SRI program)--is far too few to establish reliable
relationships in almost any area of inquiry. In the traditionally
elusive quest for psi, ten experiments from one laboratory
promise very little in the way of useful conclusions.</p>

<p>The ten SAIC experiments suffer another handicap in their
quest for scientific status. The principal investigator was not
free to run the program to maximize scientific payoff. Instead,
he had to do experiments and add variables to suit the desires of
his sponsors. The result was an attempt to explore too many
questions with too few resources. In other words, the scientific
inquiry was spread too thin. The 10 experiments were asked to
provide too many sorts of information.</p>

<p>For these reasons, even before we get to the details (and
remember the devil is usually in the details), the scientific
contribution of this set of studies will necessarily be limited.</p>

<p>PARAPSYCHOLOGY'S STATUS AS A SCIENCE</p>

<p>Parapsychology began its quest for scientific status in the
mid-1800s. At that time it was known as psychical research. The
Society for Psychical Research was founded in London in 1882.
Since that time, many investigators--including at least four
Nobel laureates--have tried to establish parapsychology as a
legitimate science. Beginning in the early 1930s, J.B. Rhine
initiated an impressive program to distance parapsychology from
its tainted beginnings in spiritualistic seances and turn it into
an experimental science. He pulled together various ideas of his
predecessors in an attempt to make the study of ESP and PK a
rigorous discipline based on careful controls and statistical
analysis.</p>

<p>His first major publication caught the attention of the
scientific community. Many were impressed with this display of a
huge database, gathered under controlled conditions, and analyzed
with the most modern statistical tools. Critics quickly attacked
the statistical basis of the research. However, Burton Camp, the
president of the Institute of Mathematical Statistics, came to
the parapsychologists' defense in 1937. He issued a statement
that if the critics were going to fault parapsychological
research they could not do so on statistical grounds. The critics
then turned their attention to methodological weaknesses. Here
they had more success.</p>

<p>What really turned scientists against parapsychological
claims, however, was the fact that several scientists failed to
replicate Rhine's results. This problem of replicability has
plagued parapsychology ever since. The few, but well-publicized,
cheating scandals that were uncovered also worked against
parapsychology's acceptance into the general scientific
community.</p>

<p>Parapsychology shares with other sciences a number of
features. The database comes from experiments using controlled
procedures, double-blind techniques where applicable, the latest
and most sophisticated apparatus, and sophisticated statistical
analysis. In addition, the findings are reported at annual
meetings and in refereed journals.</p>

<p>Unfortunately, as I have pointed out elsewhere, parapsychology
has other characteristics that make its status as a normal
science problematic. Here I will list only a few. These are worth
mentioning because they impinge upon the assessment of the
scientific status of the SAIC program. Probably the most
frequently discussed problem is the issue of replicability. Both
critics and parapsychologists have agreed that the lack of
consistently replicable results has been a major reason for
parapsychology's failure to achieve acceptance by the scientific
establishment.</p>

<p>Some parapsychologists have urged their colleagues to refrain
from demanding such acceptance until they can put examples of
replicable experiments before the scientific community. The late
parapsychologist J.G. Pratt went further and argued that
parapsychology would never develop a replicable experiment. He
argued that psi was real but would forever elude deliberate
control. More recently, the late Honorton claimed that the
ganzfeld experiments had, indeed, achieved the status of a
replicable paradigm. The title of the landmark paper in the
January 1994 issue of the <i>Psychological Bulletin </i>by Bem
and Honorton is &quot;Does psi exist? Replicable evidence for an
anomalous process of information transfer.&quot; In her position
paper &quot;Replication and meta-analysis in parapsychology&quot;
(<i>Statistical Science, </i>1991, 6, pp. 363-403), Jessica Utts
reviews the evidence from meta-analyses of parapsychological
research to argue that replication has been demonstrated and that
the overall evidence indicates that there is an anomalous effect
in need of explanation.</p>

<p>In evaluating the SAIC research, Utts points to the
consistency of effect sizes produced by the expert viewers across
experiments as well as the apparent consistency of average effect
sizes of the SRI and SAIC experiments with those from other
parapsychological laboratories. These consistencies in effect
sizes across experiments and laboratories, in her opinion,
justify the claim that anomalous mental phenomena can be reliably
replicated with appropriately designed experiments. This is an
important breakthrough for parapsychology, if it is true.
However, to anticipate some of my later commentary, I wish to
emphasize that simply replicating effect size is not the same
thing as showing the repeated occurrence of anomalous mental
phenomena. Effect size is nothing more than a standardized
difference between an observed and an expected outcome
hypothesized on the basis of an idealized probability model. An
indefinite number of factors can cause departures from the
idealized probability model. An investigator needs to go well
beyond the mere demonstration that effect sizes are the same
before he/she can legitimately claim that they are caused by the
same underlying phenomenon.</p>

<p>In my opinion, a more serious challenge to parapsychology's
quest for scientific status is the lack of cumulativeness in its
database. Only parapsychology, among the fields of inquiry
claiming scientific status, lacks a cumulative database. Physics
has changed dramatically since Newton conducted his famous
experiment using prisms to show that white light contained all
the colors of the spectrum. Yet, Newton's experiment is still
valid and still yields the same results. Psychology has changed
its ideas about the nature of memory since Ebbinghaus conducted
his famous experiments on the curve of forgetting in the 1880s.
We believe that memory is more dynamic and complicated than can
be captured by Ebbinghaus' ideas about a passive, rote memory
system. Nevertheless, his findings still can be replicated and
they form an important part of our database on memory.</p>

<p>Parapsychology, unlike the other sciences, has a shifting
database. Experimental data that one generation puts forth as
rock-solid evidence for psi is discarded by later generations in
favor of new data. When the Society for Psychical Research was
founded in 1882, its first president Henry Sidgwick, pointed to
the experiments with the Creery sisters as the evidence that
should convince even the most hardened skeptic of the reality of
psi. Soon, he and the other members of the Society argued that
the data from Smith-Blackburn experiments provided the
fraud-proof case for the reality of telepathy. The next
generation of psychical researchers, however, cast aside these
cases as defective and we no longer hear about them. Instead,
they turned to new data to argue their case.</p>

<p>During the 1930s and 1940s, the results of Rhine's card
guessing experiments were offered as the solid evidence for the
reality of psi. The next generation dropped Rhine's data as being
flawed and difficult to replicate and it hailed the Soal-Goldney
experiments as the replicable and rock-solid basis for the
existence of telepathy. Next came the Sheep-Goat experiments.
Today, the Rhine data, the Sheep-Goats experiments, and the
Soal-Goldney experiments no longer are used to argue the case for
psi. Contemporary parapsychologists, instead, point to the
ganzfeld experiments, the random-number generator experiments,
and--with the declassifying of the SAIC experiments--the remote
viewing experiments as their basis for insisting that psi exists.</p>

<p>Professor Utts uses the ganzfeld data and the SAIC remote
viewing results to assert that the existence of anomalous
cognition has been proven. She does not completely discard
earlier data. She cites meta-analyses of some of the earlier
parapsychology experiments. Still, the cumulative database for
anomalous mental phenomena does not exist. Most of the data
accumulated by previous investigators has been discarded. In most
cases the data have been discarded for good reasons. They were
subsequently discovered to be seriously flawed in one or more
ways that was not recognized by the original investigators. Yet,
at the time they were part of the database, the parapsychologists
were certain that they offered incontestable evidence for the
reality of psi.</p>

<p>How does this discussion relate to our present concerns with
the scientific status of the SAIC program? This consideration of
the shifting database of parapsychology offers a cautionary note
to the use of contemporary research on the ganzfeld and remote
viewing as solid evidence for anomalous mental phenomena. More
than a century of parapsychological research teaches us that each
generation of investigators was sure that it had found the `Holy
Grail'--the indisputable evidence for psychic functioning. Each
subsequent generation has abandoned their predecessors' evidence
as defective in one way or another. Instead, the new generation
had its own version of the holy grail.</p>

<p>Today, the parapsychologists offer us the ganzfeld experiments
and, along with Jessica Utts, will presumably will include the
SAIC remote viewing experiments as today's reasons for concluding
that anomalous cognition has been demonstrated. Maybe this
generation is correct. Maybe, this time the&quot;
indisputable&quot; evidence will remain indisputable for
subsequent generations. However, it is too soon to tell. Only
history will reveal the answer. As E.G. Boring once wrote, when
writing about the Soal-Goldney experiments, you cannot hurry
history.</p>

<p>Meanwhile, as I will point out later in this report, there are
hints and suggestions that history may repeat itself. Where Utts
sees consistency and incontestable proof, I see inconsistency and
hints that all is not as rock-solid as she implies.</p>

<p>I can list other reasons to suggest that parapsychology's
status as a science is shaky, at best. Some of these reasons will
emerge as I discuss specific aspects of the SAIC results and
their relation to other contemporary parapsychological research.</p>

<p>THE CLAIM THAT ANOMALOUS COGNITION EXISTS</p>

<p>Professor Utts concludes that &quot;psychic functioning has
been well established.&quot; She bases this conclusion on three
other claims: 1) the statistical results of the SAIC and other
parapsychological experiments &quot;are far beyond what is
expected by chance&quot; ; 2) &quot;arguments that these results
could be due to methodological flaws are soundly refuted&quot; ;
and 3) &quot;Effects of similar magnitude to those found in
government-sponsored research at SRI and SAIC have been
replicated at a number of laboratories across the world.&quot;</p>

<p>Later, in this report, I will raise questions about her major
conclusion and the three supporting claims. In this section, I
want to unpack just what these claims entail. I will start with
the statistical findings. Parapsychological is unique among the
sciences in relying solely on significant departures from a
chance baseline to establish the presence of its alleged
phenomenon. In the other sciences the defining phenomena can be
reliably observed and do not require indirect statistical
measures to justify their existence. Indeed, each branch of
science began with phenomena that could be observed directly.
Gilbert began the study of magnetism by systematically studying a
phenomenon that had been observed and was known to the ancients
as well as his contemporaries. Modern physics began by becoming
more systematic about moving objects and falling bodies.
Psychology became a systematic science by looking for lawful
relationships among sensory discriminations. Another starting
point was the discovery of lawful relationships in the
remembering and forgetting of verbal materials. Note that in none
of these cases was the existence of the defining phenomena in
question. No one required statistical tests and effect sizes to
decide if magnetism was present or if a body had fallen.
Psychophysicists did not need to reject a null hypothesis to
decide if sensory processes were operating and memory researchers
did not have to rely on reaching accepted levels of significance
to know if recall or forgetting had occurred.</p>

<p>Each of the major sciences began with phenomena whose presence
was not in question. The existence of the primary phenomena was
never in question. Each science began by finding systematic <i>relationships</i>
among <i>variations</i> in the magnitudes of attributes of the
central phenomena and the attributes of independent variables
such as time, location, etc. The questions for the investigation
of memory had to do with how best to describe the forgetting
curve and what factors affected its parameters. No statistical
tests or determination of effect sizes were required to decide
if, in fact, forgetting was or was not present on any particular
occasion.</p>

<p>Only parapsychology claims to be a science on the basis of
phenomena (or a phenomenon) whose presence can be detected only
by rejecting a null hypothesis. To be fair, parapsychologists
also talk about doing process research where the emphasis is on
finding systematic relationships between attributes of psi and
variations in some independent variable. One conclusion from the
SRI/SAIC project, for example, is that there is no relationship
between the distance of the target from the viewer and the
magnitude of the effect size for anomalous cognition. However, it
is still the case that the effect size, and even the question of
whether anomalous cognition was present in any experiment, is
still a matter of deciding if a departure from a chance base line
is non-accidental.</p>

<p>At this point I think it is worth emphasizing that the use of
statistical inference to draw conclusions about the null
hypothesis assumes that the underlying probability model
adequately represents the distributions and variations in the
real world situation. The underlying probability model is an <i>idealization</i>
of the empirical situation for which it is being used. Whether or
not the model is appropriate for any given application is an
empirical matter and the adequacy of the model has to be
justified for each new application. Empirical studies have shown
that statistical models fit real world situations only
approximately. The tails of real-world distributions, for
example, almost always contain more cases than the standard
statistics based on the normal curve assume. These departures
from the idealized model do not have much practical import in
many typical statistical applications because the statistical
tests are <i>robust</i>. That is, the departures of the actual
situation from the assumed probability model typically do not
distort the outcome of the statistical test.</p>

<p>However, when statistical tests are used in situations beyond
their ordinary application, they can result in rejections of the
null hypothesis for reasons other than a presumed departure from
the expected chance value. Parapsychologists often complain that
their results fail to replicate because of inadequate power.
However, because the underlying probability models are only
approximations, <i>too much power</i> can lead to rejections of
the null hypothesis simply because the real world and the
idealized statistical model are not exact matches. This
discussion emphasizes that significant findings can arise for
many reasons--including the simple fact that statistical
inference is based on idealized models that mirror the real world
only approximately.</p>

<p>I agree with Jessica Utts that the effect sizes reported in
the SAIC experiments and in the recent ganzfeld studies probably
cannot be dismissed as due to chance. Nor do they appear to be
accounted for by multiple testing, file-drawer distortions,
inappropriate statistical testing or other misuse of statistical
inference. I do not rule out the possibility that some of this
apparent departure from the null hypothesis might simply reflect
the failure of the underlying model to be a truly adequate model
of the experimental situation. However, I am willing to assume
that the effect sizes represent true effects beyond inadequacies
in the underlying model. Statistical effects, by themselves, do
not justify claiming that anomalous cognition has been
demonstrated--or, for that matter, that an anomaly of any kind
has occurred.</p>

<p>So, I accept Professor Utts' assertion that the statistical
results of the SAIC and other parapsychological experiments
&quot;are far beyond what is expected by chance.&quot;
Parapsychologists, of course, realize that the truth of this
claim does not constitute proof of anomalous cognition. Numerous
factors can produce significant statistical results.
Operationally, the presence of anomalous cognition is detected by
the elimination of all other possibilities. This reliance on a <i>negative
definition of its central phenomenon</i> is another liability
that parapsychology brings with its attempt to become a
recognized science. Essentially, anomalous cognition is claimed
to be present whenever statistically significant departures from
the null hypothesis are observed under conditions that preclude
the operation of all mundane causes of these departures. As
Boring once observed, every success in parapsychological research
is a failure. By this he meant that when the investigator or the
critics succeed in finding a scientifically acceptable
explanation for the significant effect the claim for ESP or
anomalous cognition has failed.</p>

<p>Having accepted the existence of non-chance effects, the focus
now is upon whether these effects have normal causes. Since the
beginning of psychical research, each claim that psychic
functioning had been demonstrated was countered by critics who
suggested other reasons for the observed effects. Typical
alternatives that have been suggested to account for the effects
have been fraud, statistical errors, and methodological
artifacts. In the present discussion I am not considering fraud
or statistical errors. This leaves only methodological oversight
as the source for a plausible alternative to psychic functioning.
Utts has concluded that &quot;arguments that these results could
be due to methodological flaws are soundly refuted.&quot; If she
is correct, then I would have to agree with her bottom line
&quot;that psychic functioning has been well established.&quot;</p>

<p>Obviously I do not agree that all possibilities for
alternative explanations of the non-chance results have been
eliminated. The SAIC experiments are well-designed and the
investigators have taken pains to eliminate the known weaknesses
in previous parapsychological research. In addition, I cannot
provide suitable candidates for what flaws, if any, might be
present. Just the same, it is impossible in principle to say that
any particular experiment or experimental series is completely
free from possible flaws. An experimenter cannot control for
every possibility--especially for potential flaws that have not
yet been discovered.</p>

<p>At this point, a parapsychologist might protest that such
&quot;in principle&quot; arguments can always be raised against
any findings, no matter how well conceived was the study from
which they emerged. Such a response is understandable, but I
believe my caution is reasonable in this particular case.
Historically, many cases of evidence for psi were proffered on
the grounds that they came from experiments of impeccable
methodological design. Only subsequently, sometimes by fortunate
accident, did the possibility of a serious flaw or alternative
explanation of the results become available. The founders of the
Society for Psychical Research believed that the Smith-Blackburn
experiments afforded no alternative to the conclusion that
telepathy was involved. They could conceive of no mundane
explanation. Then Blackburn confessed and explained in detail
just how he and Smith had tricked the investigators.</p>

<p>The critics became suspicious of the Soal-Goldney findings not
only because the results were too good, but also because Soal
lost the original records under suspicious circumstances. Hansel,
Scott, and Price each generated elaborate scenarios to explain
how Soal might have cheated. Hansel and Scott reported finding
peculiar patterns in the data. The scenarios, for accounting for
these data, however, were extremely complicated and required the
collusion of several individuals--some of whom were prominent
statesmen and academics. The discovery of how Soal actually had
cheated was made by the parapsychologist Betty Markwick. The
finding came about through fortuitous circumstances. The method
of cheating turned out to involve only one person and employed an
ingenious, but simple, method that none of the critics had
anticipated.</p>

<p>During the first four years of the original ganzfeld-psi
experiments, the investigators asserted that their findings
demonstrated psi because the experimental design precluded any
normal alternative. Only after I and a couple of
parapsychologists independently pointed out how the use of a
single set of targets could provide a mundane alternative to
psychic communication did the ganzfeld experimenters realize the
existence of this flaw. After careful and lengthy scrutiny of the
ganzfeld database, I was able to generate a lengthy list of
potential flaws.</p>

<p>Honorton and his colleagues devised the autoganzfeld
experiments. These experiments were deliberately designed to
preclude the flaws that I and others had eventually discovered in
the original ganzfeld database. When the statistically
significant results emerged from these latter experiments, they
were proclaimed to be proof of anomalous communication because
all alternative mundane explanations had been eliminated. When I
was first confronted with these findings, I had to admit that the
investigators had eliminated all but one of the flaws that I had
listed for the original database. For some reason, Honorton and
his colleagues did not seem to consider seriously the necessity
of insuring that their randomization procedures were optimal.
However, putting this one oversight aside, I could find no
obvious loopholes in the experiments as reported.</p>

<p>When I was asked to comment on the paper that Daryl Bem and
Charles Honorton wrote for the January 1994 issue of the <i>Psychological
Bulletin,</i> I was able to get much of the raw data from
Professor Bem. My analyses of that data revealed strong patterns
that, to me, pointed to an artifact of some sort. One pattern,
for example, was the finding that all the significant hitting
above chance occurred only on the second or later occurrence of a
target. All the first occurrences of a target yielded results
consistent with chance. Although this was a post hoc finding, it
was not the result of a fishing expedition. I deliberately looked
for such a pattern as an indirect way of checking for the
adequacy of the randomization procedures. The pattern was quite
strong and persisted in every breakdown of the data that I
tried--by separate investigator, by target type, by individual
experiment, etc. The existence of this pattern by itself does not
prove it is the result of an artifact. As expected, Professor Bem
seized upon it as another peculiarity of psi. Subsequent to
finding this pattern, I have learned about many other weaknesses
in this experiment which could have compromised the results.
Robert Morris and his colleagues at the University of Edinburgh
took these flaws ,as well as some additional ones that they
uncovered, into account when they designed the ganzfeld
replication experiments.</p>

<p>The point of this discussion is that it takes some time before
we fully recognize the potential flaws in a newly designed
experimental protocol. In some cases, the discovery of a serious
flaw is the result of a fortuitous occurrence. In other cases,
the uncovering of flaws came about only after the new protocol
had been used for a while. Every new experimental design, as is
the case for every new computer program, requires a shakedown
period and debugging. The problems with any new method or design
are not always apparent at first. Obvious flaws may be eliminated
only to be replaced by more subtle ones.</p>

<p>How does this apply to the SAIC experiments? These experiments
were designed to eliminate the obvious flaws of the previous
remote viewing experiments at SRI. Inspection of the protocol
indicates that they succeeded in this respect. The new design and
methodology, however, has not had a chance to be used in other
laboratories or to be properly debugged. Many of the features
that could be considered an asset also have possible down sides.
I will return to this later in the report when I discuss the use
of the same viewers and the same judge across the different
experiments. For now, I just want to suggest some general grounds
for caution in accepting the claim that all possible
methodological flaws have been eliminated.</p>

<p>The third warrant for Jessica Utts' conclusion that psi has
been proven is that &quot;Effects of similar magnitude to those
found in government-sponsored research at SRI and SAIC have been
replicated at a number of laboratories across the world.&quot; I
will discuss this matter below. For now, I will point out that
effects of similar magnitude can occur for several different
reasons. Worse, the average effect size from different
parapsychological research programs is typically a meaningless
composite of arbitrary units. As such, these averages do not
represent meaningful parameters in the real world. For example,
Honorton claimed that the autoganzfeld experiments replicated the
original ganzfeld experiments because the average effect size for
both databases was approximately identical. This apparent
similarity in average effect size is meaningless for many
reasons. For one thing, the similarity in size depends upon which
of many possible averages one considers. In the case under
consideration the average effect size was obtained by adding up
all the hits and trials for the 28 studies in the database. One
experimenter contributed almost half to this total. Others
contributed in greatly unequal numbers. The average will differ
if each experimenter's contribution is given equal weight.</p>

<p>In addition, the heterogeneity of effect sizes among separate
investigators is huge. All the effect sizes, for example, of one
the investigators were negative. Another investigator contributed
mostly moderately large effect sizes. If the first investigator
had contributed more trials to the total, then the average would
obviously have been lower. Similar problems exist for the average
from the autoganzfeld experiments. In these latter experiments,
the static targets--which most closely resembled the overwhelming
majority of targets in the original database--yielded an effect
size of zero. The dynamic targets yielded a highly significant
and moderate effect size. Is the correct average effect size for
these experiments based on a composite of the results of the
static and dynamic targets or should it be based only the dynamic
targets?</p>

<p>THE SAIC PROGRAM</p>

<p>As I have indicated, the SAIC experiments are an improvement
on both the preceding SRI experiments as well as previous
parapsychological investigations. The investigators seem to have
taken pains to insure that randomization of targets for
presentation and for judging was done properly. They have
eliminated the major flaw in original SRI remote viewing
experiments of non-independence in trials for a given viewer.
Some of the other features can be considered as improvements but
also as possible problems. In this category I would list the use
of the same experienced viewers in many experiments and the use
of the same target set across experiments. The major limitations
that I see in these studies derive from their newness and their
having been conducted in secrecy. The newness simply means that
we have not had sufficient time to debug and to grasp fully both
the strengths and weaknesses of this protocol. The secrecy
aggravated this limitation by preventing other investigators from
reviewing and criticizing the experiments from the beginning, and
by making it impossible for independent laboratories to replicate
the findings. (1)</p>

<p>The fact that these experiments were conducted in the same
laboratory, with the same basic protocol, using the same viewers
across experiments, the same targets across experiments, and the
same investigators aggravates, rather than alleviates, the
problem of independent replication. If subtle, as-yet-undetected
bias and flaws exist is the protocol, the very consistency of
elements such as targets, viewers, investigators, and procedures
across experiments enhances the possibility that these flaws will
be compounded.</p>

<p>Making matters even worse is the use of the same judge across
all experiments. The judging of viewer responses is a critical
factor in free-response remote viewing experiments. Ed May, the
principle investigator, as I understand it, has been the sole
judge in all the free response experiments. May's rationale for
this unusual procedure was that he is familiar with the response
styles of the individual viewers. If a viewer, for example, talks
about bridges, May--from his familiarity with this viewer--might
realize that this viewer uses bridges to refer to any object that
is on water. He could then interpret the response accordingly to
make the appropriate match to a target. Whatever merit this
rationale has, it results in a methodological feature that
violates some key principles of scientific credibility. One might
argue that the judge, for example, should be blind not only about
the correct target but also about who the viewer is. More
important, the scientific community at large will be reluctant to
accept evidence that depends upon the ability of one specific
individual. In this regard, the reliance on the same judge for
all free-response experiments is like the experimenter effect. To
the extent that the results depend upon a particular investigator
the question of scientific objectivity arises. Scientific proof
depends upon the ability to generate evidence that, in principle,
any serious and competent investigator--regardless of his or her
personality--can observe.</p>

<p>The use of the same judge across experiments further compounds
the problem of non-independence of the experiments. Here, both
Professor Utts and I agree. We believe it is important that the
remote viewing results be obtainable with different judges.
Again, the concern here is that the various factors that are
similar across experiments, count against their separate findings
as independent evidence for anomalous cognition.</p>

<p>HAS ANOMALOUS COGNITION BEEN PROVEN?</p>

<p>Obviously, I do not believe that the contemporary findings of
parapsychology, including those from the SRI/SAIC program,
justify concluding that anomalous mental phenomena have been
proven. Professor Utts and some parapsychologists believe
otherwise. I admit that the latest findings should make them
optimistic. The case for psychic functioning seems better than it
ever has been. The contemporary findings along with the output of
the SRI/SAIC program do seem to indicate that something beyond
odd statistical hiccups is taking place. I also have to admit
that I do not have a ready explanation for these observed
effects. Inexplicable statistical departures from chance,
however, are a far cry from compelling evidence for anomalous
cognition.</p>

<p>So what would be compelling evidence for the reality of
anomalous cognition? Let's assume that the experimental results
from the SAIC remote viewing experiments continue to hold up.
Further assume that along with continued statistical significance
no flaws or mundane alternative possibilities come to light. We
would then want to ensure that similar results will occur with
new viewers, new target pools, and several independent judges.
Finally, to satisfy the normal standards of science, we would
need to have the findings successfully replicated in independent
laboratories by other parapsychologists as well as
nonparapsychologists.</p>

<p>If the parapsychologists could achieve this state of affairs,
we are faced with a possible anomaly, but not necessarily
anomalous cognition. As the parapsychologist John Palmer has
recognized, parapsychologists will have to go beyond
demonstrating the presence of a statistical anomaly before they
can claim the presence of psychic functioning. This is because,
among other things, the existence of a statistical anomaly is
defined negatively. Something is occurring for which we have no
obvious or ready explanation. This something may or may not turn
out to be paranormal. According to Palmer, parapsychologists will
have to devise a <i>positive theory of the paranormal</i> before
they will be in a position to claim that the observed anomalies
indicate paranormal functioning.</p>

<p>Without such a positive theory, we have no way of specifying
the boundary conditions for anomalous mental phenomena. Without
such a theory we have no way of specifying when psi is present
and when it is absent. Because psi or anomalous cognition is
currently detected only by departures from a null hypothesis all
kinds of problems beset the quest for the claim and pursuit of
psychic functioning. For example, the <i>decline effect, </i>which
was investigated in one of the SAIC experiments, was once used as
an important sign for the presence of psi. J.B. Rhine discovered
this effect not only in some of his data but in his re-analyses
of data collected by earlier investigators. He attached great
importance to his effect because it existed in data whose
investigators neither knew of its existence nor had they been
seeking it. In addition, the decline effect helped Rhine to
explain how seemingly null results really contained evidence for
psi. This is because the decline effect often showed up as an
excess of hitting in the early half of the experiment and as a
deficit of hitting in the second half of the experiment. These
two halves, when pooled together over the entire experiment,
yielded an overall hit rate consistent with chance.</p>

<p>Although Rhine and other parapsychologists attached great
importance to the decline effect as a reliable and often hidden
sign of the presence of psychic functioning, the reliance on this
indicator unwittingly emphasizes serious problems in the
parapsychologist's quest. As the SAIC report on binary coding
states, the decline effect is claimed for a bewildering variety
of possibilities. Some investigators have found a decline effect
going from the first quarter to the last quarter of each separate
score sheet in their experiment. Other investigators have
reported a decline effect as a decrease in hit rate from the
first half to the second half of the total experiment. Still
others find a decline effect across separate experiments. Indeed,
almost any variation where the direction is from a higher hit
rate to a lower hit rate has been offered as evidence for a
decline effect. To confuse matters further, some investigators
have claimed finding evidence for an<i> incline effect.</i></p>

<p>If the decline effect is a token for the presence of psi, what
should one conclude when the data, as was the case in the SAIC
experiment on binary coding, show a significant departure from
the null hypothesis <i>but no decline effect?</i> We know what
the parapsychologist's conclude. As long as they get a
significant effect, they do not interpret the absence of the
decline effect as the absence of psychic functioning. This state
of affairs holds as well for several other effects that have been
put forth as tokens or signs of anomalous mental functioning.
Several such signs are listed in the <i>Handbook of
Parapsychology</i> [1977, B.B. Wolman, Editor].</p>

<p>Typically, such signs are sought when the attempt to reject
the ordinary null hypothesis fails. <i>Displacement effects</i>
are frequently invoked. When his attempts to replicate Rhine's
results failed, Soal was persuaded to re-analyze his data in
terms of displacement effects. His retrospective analysis
uncovered two subjects whose guesses significantly correlated
with the target one or two places ahead of the intended target.
In his subsequent experiments with these two subjects, one kept
hitting on the symbol that came after the intended target while
the other produced significant outcomes only when her guesses
were matched against the symbol that occurred just before the
intended target. Negative hitting, increased variability, and
other types of departures from the underlying theoretical
probability model have all been used as hidden signs of the
presence of psychic functioning.</p>

<p>What makes this search for hidden tokens of psi problematic is
lack of constraints. Any time the original null hypothesis cannot
be rejected, the eager investigator can search through the data
for one or more these markers. When one is found, the
investigator has not hesitated in offering this as proof of the
presence of psi. However, if the null hypothesis is rejected and
none of these hidden signs of psi can be found in the data, the
the investigator still claims the presence of psi. This creates
the scientifically questionable situation where any significant
departure from a probability model is used as proof of psi but
the absence of these departures does not count as evidence
against the presence of psi.</p>

<p>So, acceptable evidence for the presence of anomalous
cognition must be based on a positive theory that tells us when
psi should and <i>should not </i>be present. Until we have such a
theory, the claim that anomalous cognition has been demonstrated
is empty. Without such a theory, we might just as well argue that
what has been demonstrated is a set of effects-<i>-each one of
which be the result of an entirely different cause.</i></p>

<p>Professor Utts implicitly acknowledges some of the preceding
argument by using consistency of findings with other laboratories
as evidence that anomalous cognition has been demonstrated. I
have already discussed why the apparent consistency in average
effect size across experiments cannot be used as an argument for
consistency of phenomena across these experiments. To be fair,
parapsychologists who argue consistency of phenomena across
experiments often go beyond simply pointing to consistency in
effect sizes.</p>

<p>One example is the claim that certain personality correlates
replicate across experiments. May and his colleagues correctly
point out, however, that these correlations tend to be low and
inconsistent. Recently, parapsychologists have claimed that
extroversion correlates positively with successful performance on
anomalous cognition tasks. This was especially claimed to be true
of the ganzfeld experiments. However, the apparently successful
replication of the autoganzfeld experiments by the Edinburgh
group [under subcontract to the SAIC program] found that the
introverts, if anything, scored higher than the extroverts.</p>

<p>The autoganzfeld experiments produced significant effects only
for the dynamic targets. The static targets produced zero effect
size. Yet the bulk of the targets in the original ganzfeld
database were static and they produced an effect size that was
significantly greater than the zero effect size of the
autoganzfeld experiments [ I was able to demonstrate that there
was adequate power to detect an effect size of the appropriate
magnitude for the static targets in the autoganzfeld
experiments]. Further indication of inconsistency is the SAIC
experiment which found that the only the static targets produced
a significant effect size, whereas the dynamic targets yielded a
zero effect size. May and his colleagues speculated that the
failure of the dynamic targets was due to a `bandwidth' that was
too wide. When they apparently narrowed the bandwidth of the
dynamic targets in a second experiment, both dynamic and static
targets did equally well. It is unclear whether this should be
taken as evidence for consistency or inconsistency. Note that the
hypothesis and claim for the autoganzfeld experiments is that
dynamic targets should be significantly better than static ones.
As far as I can tell the original dynamic targets of the ganzfeld
experiments are consistent with an unlimited bandwidth.</p>

<p>Other important inconsistencies exist among the contemporary
databases. The <i>raison d'�tre </i>for the ganzfeld experiments
is the belief among some parapsychologists that an altered state
facilitates picking up the psi signal because it lowers the
noise-to-signal ratio from external sensory input. The touchstone
of this protocol is the creation of an altered state in the
receiver. This contrasts sharply with the remote viewing
experiments in which the viewer is always in a normal state. More
important is that the ganzfeld researchers believe that they get
best results when each subject serves as his/her own judge. Those
experiments in the ganzfeld database that employed both external
judges and subjects as their own judges found that their results
were more successful using subjects as their own judges. The
reverse is true in the remote viewing experiments. The remote
viewer experimenters believe that external judges provide much
better hit rates than viewer-judges. This difference is even more
extreme in the SAIC remote viewing where a single judge was used
for all experiments. This judge, who was also the principal
investigator, believed that he could achieve best results if he
did the judging because of his familiarity with the response
styles of the individual viewers.</p>

<p>So even if the ganzfeld and the SAIC remote viewing
experiments have achieved significant effects and average effect
sizes of approximately the same magnitude, there is no compelling
reason to assume they are dealing with the same phenomena or
phenomenon. To make such a claim entails showing that the alleged
effect shows the same pattern of relationships in each protocol.
Almost certainly, a positive theory of anomalous mental phenomena
that predicts lawful relationships of a recognizable type will be
necessary before a serious claim can be made that the same
phenomenon is present across different research laboratories and
experiments. Such a positive theory will be necessary also to
tell us when we are and when we are not in the presence of this
alleged anomalous cognition.</p>

<p>WHAT NEEDS TO BE EXPLAINED?</p>

<p>Professor Utts and many parapsychologists argue that they have
produced evidence of an anomaly that requires explanation. They
assert that the statistical effects they have documented cannot
be accounted for in terms of normal scientific principles or
methodological artifact. After reviewing the results from the
SAIC experiments in the context of other contemporary
parapsychological research, Utts is confident that more than an
anomaly has been demonstrated. She believes the evidence suffices
to conclude that the anomaly establishes the existence of psychic
functioning.</p>

<p>This evidence for anomalous cognition, according to Utts and
the parapsychologists, meets the standards employed by the other
sciences. By this, I think Professor Utts means that in many
areas of scientific inquiry the decision that a real effect has
occurred is based on rules of statistical inference. Only if the
null hypothesis of no difference between two or more treatments
is rejected can the investigator claim that the differences are
real in the sense that they are greater than might be expected on
the basis of some baseline variability. According to this
standard, it seems that the SAIC experiments as well as the
recent ganzfeld experiments have yielded effects that cannot be
dismissed as the result of normal variability.</p>

<p>While the rejection of the null hypothesis is typically a <i>necessary</i>
step for claiming that an hypothesized effect or relationship has
occurred, it is never <i>sufficient</i>. Indeed, because the
underlying probability model is only an approximation, everyone
realizes that the null hypothesis is rarely, if ever, strictly
true. In practice, the investigator hopes that the statistical
test is sufficiently <i>robust</i> that it will reject the null
hypothesis only for meaningful departures from the null
hypothesis. With sufficient power, the null hypothesis will
almost certainly be rejected in most realistic situations. This
is because effect sizes will rarely be exactly zero. Even if the
true effect size is zero in a particular instance, sufficient
power can result in the rejection of the null hypothesis because
the assumed statistical model will depart from the real-world
situation in other ways. For most applications of statistical
inference, then,<i> too much power</i> can result in mistaken
inferences as well as <i>too little power.</i></p>

<p>Here we encounter another way in which parapsychological
inquiry differs from typical scientific inquiry. In those
sciences that rely on statistical inference, they do so as an aid
to weeding out effects that could be the result of chance
variability. When effect sizes are very small or if the
experimenter needs to use many more cases than is typical for the
field to obtain significance, the conclusions are often suspect.
This is because we know that with enough cases an investigator
will get a significant result, regardless of whether it is
meaningful or not. Parapsychologists are unique in postulating a
null hypothesis that entails a true effect size of zero if psi is
not operating. Any significant outcome, then, becomes evidence
for psi. My concern here is that small effects and other
departures from the statistical model can be expected to occur in
the absence of psi. The statistical model is only an
approximation. When power is sufficient and when the statistical
test is pushed too far, rejections of the null hypothesis are
bound to occur. This is another important reason why claiming the
existence of an anomaly based solely on evidence from statistical
inference is problematic.</p>

<p>This is one concern about claiming the existence of an anomaly
on the basis of statistical evidence. In the context of this
report, I see it as a minor concern. As I have indicated, I am
willing to grant Professor Utts' claim that the rejection of the
null hypothesis is probably warranted in connection with the SAIC
and the ganzfeld databases. I have other concerns. Both have to
do with the fact that no other science, so far as I know, would
draw conclusions about the existence of phenomena solely on the
basis of statistical findings. Although it is consistent with
scientific practice to use statistical inference to reject the
null hypothesis, it is not consistent with such practice to
postulate the existence of phenomena on this basis alone. Much
more is required. I will discuss at least two additional
requirements.</p>

<p>Thomas Kuhn's classic characterization of normal and
revolutionary science has served as the catalyst for many
discussions about the nature of scientific inquiry. He
popularized the idea that normal scientific inquiry is guided by
what he called a <i>paradigm</i>. Later, in the face of
criticisms, he admitted that he had used the term <i>paradigm</i>
to cover several distinct and sometimes contradictory features of
the scientific process. One of his key uses of the term <i>paradigm</i>
was to refer to the store of <i>exemplars</i> or textbook cases
of standard experiments that every field of scientific inquiry
possesses. These exemplars are what enable members of a
scientific community to quickly learn and share common
principles, procedures, methods, and standards. These exemplars
are also the basis for initiating new members into the community.
New research is conducted by adapting one or more of the patterns
in existing exemplars as guidelines about what constitutes
acceptable research in the field under consideration.</p>

<p>Every field of inquiry, including parapsychology, has its
stock of exemplars. In parapsychology these would include the
classic card guessing experiments of J.B. Rhine, the Sheep-Goat
experiments, etc. What is critical here is the striking
difference between the role of exemplars in parapsychology as
contrasted with their role in all other fields of scientific
inquiry. These exemplars not only serve as models of proper
procedure, but they also are teaching tools. Students in a
particular field of inquiry can be assigned the task of
replicating some of these classic experiments. The instructor can
make this assignment with the confident expectation that each
student will obtain results consistent with the original
findings. The physics instructor, for example, can ask novice
students to try Newton's experiments with colors or Gilbert's
experiments with magnets. The students who do so will get the
expected results. The psychology instructor can ask novice
students to repeat Ebbinghaus' experiments on forgetting or
Peterson and Peterson's classic experiment on short-term memory
and know that they will observe the same relationships as
reported by the original experimenters.</p>

<p>Parapsychology is the only field of scientific inquiry that<i>
does not have even one exemplar that can be assigned to students
with the expectation that they will observe the original results!
</i>In every domain of scientific inquiry, <i>with the exception
of parapsychology</i>, many core exemplars or paradigms exist
that will reliably produce the expected, lawful relationships.
This is another way of saying that the other domains of inquiry
are based upon robust, lawful phenomena whose conditions of
occurrence can be specified in such a way that even novices will
be able to observe and/or produce them. Parapsychologists do not
possess even one exemplar for which they can confidently specify
conditions that will enable anyone--let alone a novice--to
reliably witness the phenomenon.</p>

<p>The situation is worse than I have so far described. The
phenomena that can be observed with the standard exemplars do not
require sensitive statistical rejections of the null hypothesis
based on many trials to announce their presence. The exemplar in
which the student uses a prism to break white light into its
component colors requires no statistics or complicated inference
at all. The forgetting curve in the Ebbinghaus experiment,
requires nothing more than plotting proportion recalled against
trial number. Yet, to the extent that parapsychology is
approaching the day when it will possess at least one exemplar of
this sort, the &quot;observation&quot; of the
&quot;phenomenon&quot; will presumably depend upon the indirect
use of statistical inference to document its presence.</p>

<p>In the standard domains of science, this problem of having not
a single exemplar for reliably observing its alleged phenomenon,
would be taken as a sign that the domain has <i>no central
phenomena. </i>When Soviet scientists announced the discovery of
mitogenetic radiation, some western scientists attempted to
replicate the findings. Some reported success; others reported
mixed results; and many failed entirely to observe the effect.
Eventually scientists, including the Soviets, abandoned the quest
for mitogenetic radiation. Because no one, including the original
discover, could specify conditions under which the phenomenon--if
there be one--could be observed, the scientific community decided
that there was nothing to explain other than as-yet-undetected
artifacts. The same story can be told about N-Rays, Polywater,
and other candidate phenomena that could not be reliably observed
or produced. We cannot explain something for which we do not have
at least some conditions under which we can confidently say it
occurs. Even this is not enough. The alleged phenomenon not only
must reliably occur at least under some conditions but it also<i>
must reliably vary in magnitude or other attributes as a function
of other variables. </i>Without this minimal amount of
lawfulness, the idea that there is something to explain is
senseless. Yet, at best, parapsychology's current claim to having
demonstrated a form of anomalous cognition rests on the
possibility that it can generate significant differences from the
null hypothesis under conditions that are still not reliably
specified.</p>

<p>I will suggest one more reason for my belief that it is
premature to try to account for what the SAIC and the ganzfeld
experiments have so far put before us. On the basis of these
experiments, contemporary parapsychologists claim that they have
demonstrated the existence of an &quot;anomaly.&quot; I will
grant them that they have apparently demonstrated that the SAIC
and the ganzfeld experiments have generated significant effect
sizes beyond what we should expect from chance variations. I will
further admit that, at this writing, I cannot suggest obvious
methodological flaws to account for these significant effects. As
I have previously mentioned, this admission does not mean that
these experiments are free from subtle biases and potential bugs.
The experimental paradigms are too recent and insufficiently
evaluated to know for sure. I can point to departures from
optimality that might harbor potential flaws--such as the use of
a single judge across the remote viewing experiments, the active
coaching of viewers by the experimenter during judging procedures
in the ganzfeld, my discovery of peculiar patterns of scoring in
the ganzfeld experiments, etc. Having granted that significant
effects do occur in these experiments, I hasten to add that
without further evidence, I do not think we can conclude that
these effects are all due to the same cause--let alone that they
result from a single phenomenon that is paranormal in origin.</p>

<p>The additional reason for concern is the difference in the use
of `anomaly' in this context and how the term `anomaly' is used
in other sciences. In the present context, the parapsychologists
are using the term `anomaly' to refer to apparently inexplicable
departures from the null hypothesis. These departures are
considered inexplicable in the sense that apparently all normal
reasons for such departures from the null hypothesis have been
excluded. But these departures are not lawful in the sense that
the effect sizes are consistent. The effect sizes differ among
viewers and subjects; they also differ for different
experimenters; they come and go in inexplicable ways within the
same subject. Possibly some of these variations in effect size
will be found to exhibit some lawfulness in the sense that they
will correlate with other variables. The SAIC investigators, for
example, hope they have found such correlates in the entropy and
bandwidth of targets. At the moment this is just a hope.</p>

<p>The term `anomaly' is used in a much more restricted sense in
the other sciences. Typically an anomaly refers to a lawful and
precise departure from a theoretical baseline. As such it is
something the requires explaining. Astronomers were faced with a
possible anomaly when discrepancies from Newtonian theory were
reported in the orbit of Uranus. In the middle 1800s, Urban
Leverrier decided to investigate this problem. He reviewed all
the data on previous sightings of Uranus--both before and after
it had been discovered as new planet. On the basis of the
previous sightings, he laboriously recalculated the orbital path
based on Newtonian theory and the reported coordinates. Sure
enough, he found errors in the original calculations. When he
corrected for these errors, the apparent discrepancy in Uranus'
orbit was much reduced. But the newly revised orbit was still
discrepant from where it should be on Newtonian theory. With this
careful work, Leverrier had transformed a potential anomaly into
an actual anomaly. Anomaly in this sense meant a precise and
lawful departure from a well-defined theory. It was only after
the precise nature, direction, and magnitude of this discrepancy
was carefully specified did Leverrier and the scientific
community decide that here was an anomaly that required
explanation. What had to explain was quite precise. What was
needed was an explanation that exactly accounted for this
specific departure from the currently accepted theory.</p>

<p>Leverrier's solution was to postulate a new planet beyond the
orbit of Uranus. This was no easy task because it involved the
relatively unconstrained and difficult problem of inverse
perturbations. Leverrier had to decide on a size, orbit,
location, and other attributes of a hitherto unknown body whose
characteristics would be just those to produce the observed
effects on Uranus without affecting the known orbit of Saturn.
Leverrier's calculations resulted in his predicting the location
of this hitherto unknown planet and the astronomer Galle located
this new planet, Neptune, close to where Leverrier had said it
would be.</p>

<p>The point of this story is to emphasize the distinction
between the parapsychologists' use of anomaly from that of other
scientists'. Anomalies in most domains of scientific inquiry are
carefully specified deviations from a formal theory. What needs
to be explained or accounted for is precisely described. The
anomalies that parapsychologists are currently talking about
differ from this standard meaning in that the departures are from
the general statistical model and are far from having the status
of carefully specified and precise deviations from a theoretical
baseline. In this latter case we do not know what it is that we
are being asked to explain. Under what conditions can we reliably
observe it? What theoretical baselines are the results a
departure from? How much and in what direction and form do the
departures exist? What specifically must our explanation account
for?</p>

<p>Finally, I should add that some parapsychologists, at least in
the recent past, have agreed with my position that
parapsychological results are not yet ready to be placed before
the scientific community. Parapsychologists such as Beloff,
Martin Johnson, Gardner Murphy, J.G. Pratt and others have
complained that parapsychological data are volatile and messy.
Some of these investigators have urged their colleagues to first
get their house in order before they ask the scientific community
at large to take them seriously. Martin Johnson, especially, has
urged his colleagues to refrain from asking the scientific
community to accept their findings until they can tame them and
produce lawful results under specified conditions. Clearly,
parapsychology has still not reached this desired state. At best,
the results of the SAIC experiments combined with other
contemporary findings offer hope that the parapsychologists may
be getting closer to the day when they can put something before
the scientific community and challenge it to provide an
explanation.</p>

<p>POTENTIALS FOR OPERATIONAL APPLICATIONS</p>

<p>It may seem obvious that the utility of remote viewing for
intelligence gathering should depend upon its scientific
validity. If the scientific research cannot confirm the existence
of a remote viewing ability, then it would seem to be pointless
to try an use this non-existent ability for any practical
application. However, the matter is not this simple. If the
scientific research confirms the existence of anomalous
cognition, this does not guarantee that this ability would have
useful applications. Ed May, in his presentation to the
evaluation panel, gave several reasons why remote viewing could
be real and, yet, not helpful for intelligence gathering. In his
opinion, approximately 20 percent of the information supplied by
a viewer is accurate. Unfortunately, at the time the remote
viewer is generating the information, we have no way of deciding
which portion is likely to be the accurate one. Another problem
is that the viewer's information could be accurate, yet not
relevant for the intelligence analyst's purposes.</p>

<p>This question is related to the problem of boundary conditions
which I discussed earlier in this report. From both a scientific
and an operational viewpoint the claim that anomalous cognition
exists is not very credible until we have ways to specify when
and when it is not present. So far, parapsychology seems to have
concentrated only in finding ways to document the existence of
anomalous cognition. The result is a patchwork quilt of markers
that, when present, are offered as evidence for the presence of
psi. These markers or indicators include the decline effect,
negative hitting as well as positive hitting, displacement
hitting, the incline effect, increased variability, decreased
variability and just about any other way a discrepancy from a
probability model can occur. A cynic will note that the absence
of any or most of these markers is not used as evidence for the <i>absence
of psi. </i>This lack of way to distinguish between the presence
and absence of anomalous cognition creates many challenges for
parapsychology, some of which I have already discussed.</p>

<p>So, even if remote viewing is a real ability possessed by some
individuals, its usefulness for intelligence gathering is
questionable. If May is correct, then 80% of the all the
information supplied by this talented viewer will be erroneous.
Without any way to tell which statements of the views are
reliable and which are not, the use of this information may make
matters worse rather than better.</p>

<p>Can remote viewing have utility for information gathering even
if it cannot be scientifically validated? I can imagine some
possibilities for remote viewing to be an asset to the
intelligence analyst even when the viewer possesses no valid
paranormal powers. The viewer might be a person of uncommonly
good sense or have a background that enables him or her to
provide helpful information even if it does not come from a
paranormal source. Another possibility is that the viewer, even
though lacking in any truly accurate intelligence information,
might say things or open up new ways of dealing with the
analyst's problem. In this latter scenario the remote viewer is a
catalyst that may open up new ways of looking at an intelligence
situation much like programs for problem solving and creative
thinking stimulate new ways of looking at a situation. However,
if the usefulness of the remote viewer reduces to a matter of
injecting common sense or new perspectives into the situation, I
believe that we can accomplish the same purpose in more efficient
ways.</p>

<p>In considering potential utility, I am most concerned about
separation of the operational program in remote viewing from the
research and development phase. By default, the assessment of the
usefulness of the remote viewing in the operational arena is
decided entirely by subjective validation or what May and Utts
call <i>prima facie</i> evidence. Granted it is difficult to
assess adequately the effectiveness of remote viewing in the
operational domain. Nevertheless, better ways can be devised than
have apparently been used up to now. In our current attempt to
get an initial idea about the effectiveness of the current
operational use of remote viewing, we have simply been asking
individuals and agencies who have used the services of the remote
viewers, if the information they received was accurate and
useful. Whatever information we get from this survey is extremely
limited for the purposes of judging the utility of remote viewing
in the operational domain.</p>

<p>Even psychologists who should know better underrate the power
of subjective validation. Anyone who relies on <i>prima facie</i>
evidence as a basis for affirming the validity of remote viewing
should carefully read that portion of Marks and Kamman's <i>The
Psychology of the Psychic </i>[1981] in which they discuss the
SRI and their own experiments on remote viewing. In the early
stages of their attempt to replicate the SRI remote viewing
experiments, they were astonished at the high quality of their
subject's protocols and the apparent accuracy of the viewing.
After each session, the experimenters and the subject (viewer)
would visit the target site and compare the verbal protocol with
the actual site. The specific details of the viewers' responses
appeared to match specific objects in the target site with
uncanny accuracy. When they gave the verbal protocols to the
judge, a distinguished professor, to blindly match against the
actual target sites, he was astonished at how well what he
considered the closest matching protocol for each site matched
actual details of the target. He had no doubt that the viewers
had demonstrated strong remote viewing abilities.</p>

<p>So, both the viewers and the judge quickly became convinced of
the reality of remote viewing on the basis of the uncanny matches
between the verbal descriptions and the actual target sites. The
experimenters received a rude awakening when they discovered
that, despite the striking matches observed between target and
verbal description, the judge had matched the verbal protocols to
the wrong target sites. When all parties were given the results
the subjects could not understand how the judge could have
matched any but the actual target site to their descriptions. For
them the match was so obvious that it would be impossible for the
judge to have missed it. The judge, on the other hand, could not
accept that any but the matches he made could be paired with the
actual target sites.</p>

<p>This phenomenon of subjective validation is pervasive,
compelling and powerful. Psychologists have demonstrated it in a
variety of settings. I have demonstrated it and written about in
the context of the psychic reading. In the present context,
subjective validation comes about when a person evaluates the
similarity between a relatively rich verbal description and an
actual target or situation. Inevitably, many matches will be
found. Once the verbal description has been judged to be a good
match to a given target, the description gets locked in and it
becomes virtually impossible for the judge to see the description
as fitting any but the original target.</p>

<p>Unfortunately, all the so-called<i> prima facie </i>evidence
put before us is tainted by subjective validation. We are told
that the many details supplied by the viewers were indeed
inaccurate. But some details were uncannily correct and even, in
one case, hidden code words were correctly revealed. Such
accounts do indeed seem compelling. They have to be put in the
context, however, of all such operational attempts. We have to
know the general background and expectations of the viewers, the
questioners, etc. Obviously, the targets selected for the viewers
in the operational setting will have military and intelligence
relevance. If the viewer [some of the viewers have intelligence
backgrounds] suspects the general nature of the target, then
previous background knowledge might very well make the presence,
say of a gantry, highly likely. In addition, the interactions and
questioning of the viewers in these settings appear to be highly
suggestive and leading.</p>

<p>I can imagine that the preceding paragraph might strike a
reader as being unreasonable. Even allowing for subjective
validation, the possibility that a viewer might accurately come
up with secret code words and a detailed description of
particular gantry is quite remote on the basis of common sense
and sophisticated guessing. I understand the complaint and I
realize the reluctance to dismiss such evidence out of hand.
However, I have had experience with similarly compelling <i>prima
facie</i> evidence for more than a chance match between a
description and a target. In the cases I have in mind, however,
the double blind controls were used to pair descriptions with the
true as well as with the wrong target sites. In all these test
cases with which I am familiar, the unwitting subjects found the
matches between their descriptions and the presumed target
equally compelling regardless of whether the presumed target was
the actual or the wrong one.</p>

<p>What this says about operational effectiveness, is that, for
evaluation purposes, half of the time the viewers and the judges
should be mislead about the what was the actual target. In these
cases, both the interrogator and the viewer, as well as the
judge, have to be blind to the actual targets. Under such
conditions, if the judges and the others find the matches between
the verbal descriptions and the actual targets consistently
better than the matches between the verbal descriptions and the
decoy targets, then this would constitute some evidence for the
effectiveness of remote viewing. I can confidently predict,
regardless of the outcome of such an evaluation, that many of the
verbal descriptions when matched with decoy targets will be
judged to be uncanny matches.</p>

<p>SUGGESTIONS: WHAT NEXT?</p>

<p>I have played the devil's advocate in this report. I have
argued that the case for the existence of anomalous cognition is
still shaky, at best. On the other hand, I want to state that I
believe that the SAIC experiments as well as the contemporary
ganzfeld experiments display methodological and statistical
sophistication well above previous parapsychological research.
Despite better controls and careful use of statistical inference,
the investigators seem to be getting significant results that do
not appear to derive from the more obvious flaws of previous
research. I have argued that this does not justify concluding
that anomalous cognition has been demonstrated. However, it does
suggest that it might be worthwhile to allocate some resources
toward seeing whether these findings can be independently
replicated. If so, then it will be time to reassess if it is
worth pursuing the task of determining if these effects do indeed
reflect the operation of anomalous cognition. This latter quest
will involve finding lawful relationships between attributes of
this hypothesized phenomenon and different independent variables.
Both the scientific and operational value of such an alleged
phenomenon will depend upon how well the conditions for its
occurrence can be specified and how well its functioning can be
brought under control.</p>

<p>Both Professor Utts and I agree that the very first
consideration is to see if the SAIC remote viewing results will
still be significant when independent judges are used. I
understand Ed May's desire to use a judge who is very familiar
with the response styles of the experienced viewers. However, if
remote viewing is real, then conscientious judges, who are blind
to the actual targets, should still be able to match the verbal
descriptions to the actual targets better than chance. If this
cannot be done, the viability of the case for remote viewing
becomes problematical. On the other hand, assuming that
independent judges can match the descriptions to the correct
targets reasonably well, then it becomes worthwhile to try to
independently replicate the SAIC experiments.</p>

<p>At this point we face some interesting questions. Should we
try to replicate the remote viewing studies by using the same
viewers, the same targets, and the same protocol? Perhaps change
only the experimenters, the judge, and the laboratory? At some
point we would also want to change the targets. For completeness,
we would also want to search for new, talented viewers.</p>

<p>If independent replications confirm the SAIC findings, we
still have a long way to go. However, at this stage in the
proceedings, the scientific community at large might be willing
to acknowledge that an anomaly of some sort has been
demonstrated. Before the scientific community will go beyond this
acknowledgment, the parapsychologists will have to devise a
positive theory of anomalous communication from which they can
make testable predictions about relationships between anomalous
communication and other variables.</p>

<p>CONCLUSIONS</p>

<p>The Scientific Status of the SAIC Research Program</p>

<p>1. The SAIC experiments on anomalous mental phenomena are
statistically and methodologically superior to the earlier SRI
remote viewing research as well as to previous parapsychological
studies. In particular, the experiments avoided the major flaw of
non-independent trials for a given viewer. The investigators also
made sure to avoid the problems of multiple statistical testing
that was characteristic of much previous parapsychological
research.</p>

<p>2. From a scientific viewpoint, the SAIC program was hampered
by its secrecy and the multiple demands placed upon it. The
secrecy kept the program from benefiting from the checks and
balances that comes from doing research in a public forum.
Scrutiny by peers and replication in other laboratories would
accelerated the scientific contributions from the program. The
multiple demands placed on the program meant that too many things
were being investigated with too few resources. As a result, no
particular finding was followed up in sufficient detail to pin it
down scientifically. Ten experiments, no matter how well
conducted, are insufficient to fully resolve one important
question, let alone the several that were posed to the SAIC
investigators.</p>

<p>3. Although, I cannot point to any obvious flaws in the
experiments, the experimental program is too recent and
insufficiently evaluated to be sure that flaws and biases have
been eliminated. Historically, each new paradigm in
parapsychology has appeared to its designers and contemporary
critics as relatively flawless. Only subsequently did previously
unrecognized drawbacks come to light. Just as new computer
programs require a shakedown period before hidden bugs come to
light, each new scientific program requires scrutiny over time in
the public arena before its defects emerge. Some possible sources
of problems for the SAIC program are its reliance on experienced
viewers, and the use of the same judge--one who is familiar to
the viewers, for all the remote viewing.</p>

<p>4. The statistical departures from chance appear to be too
large and consistent to attribute to statistical flukes of any
sort. Although I cannot dismiss the possibility that these
rejections of the null hypothesis might reflect limitations in
the statistical model as an approximation of the experimental
situation, I tend to agree with Professor Utts that real effects
are occurring in these experiments. <i>Something</i> other than
chance departures from the null hypothesis has occurred in these
experiments.</p>

<p>5. However, the occurrence of statistical effects does not
warrant the conclusion that psychic functioning has been
demonstrated. Significant departures from the null hypothesis can
occur for several reasons. Without a positive theory of anomalous
cognition, we cannot say that these effects are due to a single
cause, let alone claim they reflect anomalous cognition. We do
not yet know how replicable these results will be, especially in
terms of showing consistent relations to other variables. The
investigators report findings that they believe show that the
degree of anomalous cognition varies with target entropy and the
`bandwidth' of the target set. These findings are preliminary and
only suggestive at this time. Parapsychologists, in the past,
have reported finding other correlates of psychic functioning
such as extroversion, sheep/goats, altered states only to find
that later studies could not replicate them.</p>

<p>6. Professor Utts and the investigators point to what they see
as consistencies between the outcome of contemporary ganzfeld
experiments and the SAIC results. The major consistency is
similarity of average effect sizes across experiments. Such
consistency is problematical because these average effect sizes,
in each case, are the result of arbitrary combinations from
different investigators and conditions. None of these averages
can be justified as estimating a meaningful parameter. Effect
size, by itself, says nothing about its origin. Where
parapsychologists see consistency, I see inconsistency. The
ganzfeld studies are premised on the idea that viewers must be in
altered state for successful results. The remote viewing studies
use viewers in a normal state. The ganzfeld experimenters believe
that the viewers should judge the match between their ideation
and the target for best results; the remote viewers believe that
independent judges provide better evidence for psi than viewers
judging their own responses. The recent autoganzfeld studies
found successful hitting only with dynamic targets and only
chance results with static targets. The SAIC investigators, in
one study, found hitting with static targets and not with dynamic
ones. In a subsequent study they found hitting for both types of
targets. They suggest that they may have solution to this
apparent inconsistency in terms of their concept of bandwidth. At
this time, this is only suggestive.</p>

<p>7. The challenge to parapsychology, if it hopes to
convincingly claim the discovery of anomalous cognition, is to go
beyond the demonstration of significant effects. The
parapsychologists need to achieve the ability to specify
conditions under which one can reliably witness their alleged
phenomenon. They have to show that they can generate lawful
relationships between attributes of this alleged phenomenon and
independent variables. They have to be able to specify boundary
conditions that will enable us to detect when anomalous cognition
is and <i>is not</i> present.</p>

<p>Suggestions for Future Research</p>

<p>1. Both Professor Utts and I agree that the first step should
be to have the SAIC protocols rejudged by independent judges who
are blind to the actual target.</p>

<p>2. Assuming that such independent judging confirms the
extra-chance matchings, the findings should be replicated in
independent laboratories. Replication could take several forms.
Some of the original viewers from the SAIC experiments could be
used. However, it seems desirable to use a new target set and
several independent judges.</p>

<p>Operational Implications</p>

<p>1. The current default assessment of the operational
effectiveness of remote viewing is fraught with hazards.
Subjective validation is well known to generate compelling, but
false, convictions that a description matches a target in
striking ways. Better, double blind, ways of assessing
operational effectiveness can be used. I suggest at least one way
in the report.</p>

<p>2. The ultimate assessment of the potential utility of remote
viewing for intelligence gathering cannot be separated from the
findings of laboratory research.</p>

<p>------------------</p>

<p>(1) The SAIC did benefit from the input of a distinguished
oversight committee. But this still falls far short of what could
have taken place in an open forum.</p>

<p>[End]</p>

<hr>

<p align="center"><font face="Verdana"><strong>Back to
mceagle.com </strong></font><a
href="http://www.mceagle.com/remote-viewing/refs/"><font
face="Verdana"><strong>References</strong></font></a></p>
</body>
</html>
