		Sorting: O(N Log2 N) Sorts and Lower Bounds

In this lecture we will discuss three O(N Log2 N) sorting algorithms (although
for quicksort, this bound is the average case, not the worst case). We will
also  discuss a non-trivial lower bound for sorting (to me, this is especially
interesting and surprising).


HeapSort:

First we discuss HeapSort. As we have seen with Heaps for priority queues, to
sort N values we can add each value into the Heap (assume the lowest value has
the highest priority) and then remove the values in order (highest one first:
use a Max-Heap). The complexity of the "online" algorithm is NxO(Log2 N) +
NxO(Log2 N) = 2NxO(Log2 N) = O(N Log2 N). The complexity of the "offline"
algorithm is O(N) + NxO(Log2 N) = O(N+NLog2 N) = O(N Log2 N). So HeapSort takes
this amount of work even in the best case.

  1) Worst/Best/Average case is O(N Log2 N)
  2) In-place (all data is stored in the array that is the heap); when we
       remove values (biggest first) we swap it with the last used location
       in the array, and then do not consider that location as part of the
       heap. The result at the end is an array filled in sorted order.
  3) O(N Log2 N) comparisons; O(N Log2 N) swaps in the worst case
  4) Unstable (percolating values up and down the tree -across many indexes
       in the array- produces instability).


MergeSort:

Next we will discuss MergeSort. This is a "divide and conquer" sort,
implemented simply via recursion. We use recursion to divide up the problem
and merging to do the "actual sorting". The array form of this sort is written
as
  template<class T>
  void merge_sort(T a[], int length) {
    merge_sort(a, 0, length-1);
  }

calling an overloaded merge_sort method that specifies the minimum and maximum
index to use when sorting the (sub)array (in the call from the method above, we
specify all indexes). This method can be written recursively
	
  template<class T>
  void merge_sort(T a[], int low, int high) {
    if (low >= high)                  //Base case: 1 value to sort->sorted
      return;                         //(0 possible only on initial call)
    else {
      int mid = (low + high)/2;       //Approximate midpoint*
      merge_sort(a, low, mid);        //Sort low to mid part of array
      merge_sort(a, mid+1, high);     //Sort mid+1 to high part of array
      merge(a, low, mid, mid+1,high); //Merge sorted subparts of array
    }
  }

Note that if low and high are adjacent, say 4 and 5, then mid = 4 and the
recursive calls are mergeSort(a, 4,4) and mergeSort(a, 5,5), which are both
base cases, requiring no work.

*(low+high)/2 when sorting arrays whose size is near the maximum int can cause
arithmetic overflow on addition (even though the final result should be between
low and high). This "error" was in many libraries, but typically did not
manifiest itself on smaller arrays. A better way to compute the closest value
to the average without overflow is low/2 + high/2 + 1(if both are odd).

All the "sorting" is done in the merge method: merge_sort just recursively
computes the positions in each part of the array to merge sort (and stops at
1 element arrays as the base case, which are by definition sorted).

Suppose that we write an original array of 16 values as follows. We choose
16 because it is a perfect power of 2, but all other sizes work as well.

 7   10    3    2    6    13   15   16   12    1    5    9    14    4   11   8 

The first level of recursive calls will split it into 2 arrays of 8 values each
(see the | character)

 7   10    3    2    6    13   15   16 | 12    1    5    9    14    4   11   8 

The next level of recursive calls will split it into 4 arrays of 4 values each.

 7   10    3    2  | 6    13   15   16 | 12    1    5    9  | 14    4   11   8 

The next level of recursive calls will split it into 8 arrays of 2 values each.

 7   10 |  3    2  | 6    13 | 15   16 | 12    1 |  5    9  | 14    4 | 11   8 

The bottom level of recursive calls will split it into 16 arrays of 1 value
each.

 7 | 10 |  3 |  2 |  6 |  13 | 15 | 16 | 12 |  1 |  5 |  9 |  14 |  4 | 11 | 8 

Now each pair of adjacent 1 value sorted arrays is merged into 8 sorted arrays
of 2 values each.

 7   10 |  2    3 |  6    13 | 15   16 |  1   12 |  5    9  |  4   14 |  8 | 11

Now each pair of adjacent 2 value sorted arrays is merged into 4 sorted arrays
of 4 values each.

 2    3    7   10 |  6    12   15   16 |  1    5    9   12  |  4 |  8   11   14

Now each pair of adjacnet 4 value sorted arrays is merged into 2 sorted arrays
of 8 values each.

 2    3    6    7   10    12   15   16 |  1    4    5    8     9   11   12  14

Finally, the remaining pair of 8 value sorted arrays is merged into 1 sorted
arrays of 16 values.

 1    2    3    4    5     6    7    8    9   10   11   12    13   14   15  16

Note that recursive calls do O(1) work; there are Log2 N levels for O(Log2 N)
net work. Merging each level requires O(N) work (justified below), so the
total amount of work is Log2 N x O(N) or O(N Log2 N).

  1) Worst/Best/Average case is O(N Log2 N)
  2) Not in-place (requires an equal sized array; see merge below)
  3) O(N Log2 N) comparisons; O(N Log2 N) movement in the worst case
  4) Stable: when we merge left and right arrays, equal values are moved
       first from the left subarray (which were originally to the left of all
       the equal values on the right subarray, ensuring stability).

Here is pseudo-code for merging

template<class T>
void merge (T a[],
            int left_low , int left_high,
            int right_low, int right_high) {

  Create a temporary array that is the same size as "a"
    (this extra storage is why the algorithm is not in-place;
     technically, we need a temporary array storing only
     right_high - left_low + 1 values)
  for every temporary array value from left_low to right_high
    if there are no more "left" values
      copy to the temporary array the next "right" value
    else if there are no more "right" values
      copy to the temporary array the next "left" value 
    else if the next "left" value <= the next "right" value
      copy to the temporary array the next "left" value 
    else
      copy to the temporary array the next "right" value

  copy the temp array back into "a": into the positions left_low to right_high
}

The Merge method merges two sorted arrays (both in a) of size about N/2 into
one sorted  array of size N (temp). The main loop puts a new value in the temp
array on every iteration, sometimes from the sorted left part of "a" and
sometimes from the sorted right part of "a". So, the loop iterates N times with
O(1) work done during each iteration, doing O(N) work

The first two ifs test whether all the values from the left/right have been
moved, and if so it moves a value from the other one. If there are values in
both, it compares them and moves the smallest (using the left of "a" when they
are equal). Finally, all the values are copied back from the temp array into
"a": another O(N) of work.

This method is easy to do with linked lists as well: although dividing the
linked list is half takes O(N) time, merging also takes O(N) times as well,
so the O(N Log2 N) complexity bound still holds for linked lists.

Finally there are iterative (non-recursive) implementations. Such code is more
complicated but not unreasonable for advanced students to write (recursion is
"simulated" by iteration and use of an explicit stack). Also, sometimes other
algorithms are faster for small N (say N <= c). So whenever the base case is an
array size <= c, we can instead call the other sorting method to to sort the
subarray, instead of calling merge sort recursively all the way down to
single-valued subarrays. Unfortunately, this is all technology based and there
is no easy way to know for a specific machine and compiler what c's value is;
we would have to test the code to get this value empirically.


QuickSort:

Finally, we will discuss QuickSort, which is also a "divide and conquer" sort,
implemented simply via recursion. We use partitioning to divide up the problem.
The array form of this sort is written much like merge_sort was, first

  template<class T>
  void quick_sort(T a[], int length) {
    quick_sort(a, 0, length-1);
  }

calling an overloaded quick_sort method that specifies the minimum and maximum
index to use when sorting the array (here, all of them). This method can be
written recursively
	
  template<class T>
  void quick_sort(T a[], int low, int high) {
    if (low >= high)  //Base case: 0 or 1 value to sort->sorted
      return;         //(0 possible on initial call and recursion)
    else {
      int pivot_index = partition(a,low,high);//Partition and return Pivot index
      quick_sort(a, low, pivot_index-1);      //Sort values to left of pivot
      quick_sort(a, pivot_index+1, high);     //Sort values to right of pivot

      //Note that after partitioning, all values to the left of the pivot are
      // < the pivot and all values to the right of the pivot are >= to the
      // pivot, so if the left/right values are sorted recursively (with the
      // pivot remaining between them), the entire array is sorted.
    }
  }

Here we call partition before the two recursive calls; in merge sort we
performed the two recursive calls first, followed by merging them together.

The partition method chooses the pivot value, then parititions the array into
those values < pivot (on the left) and those values >= pivot (on the right),
finally putting the pivot at an index in between these two. It returns the
pivot's index (so the recursive calls know which parts of the array need to be
sorted together).

Similar to MergeSort, all the sorting is done in the pivot method: quick_sort
calls partition and figures out, based on the pivot_index, where to do the
recursive calls for more paritioning (and stops at 0 or 1 element arrays, which
are by definition sorted).

The pseudo-code for partition is
  Choose the pivot value (see the discussion below) and swap the pivot value
     with the value in a[high], putting it back where it belongs at the end
  Start with l = low and r = high;
  while (l<r) {                    //Are there some values to examine?
    while (l<r && a[l] <  pivot)   //Find a left value >= the pivot
      ++l;
    while (l<r && a[r] >= pivot)   //Find a right value < the pivot
      --r;
    if (l<r)			   //If found both, swap them
      swap(a[l],a[r]);
    //if not, the while loop will terminate on the next iteration
  }

  swap(a,l,high);  //swap the pivot back where it belongs a[l] is > pivot
  return l;        //the position of the pivot

Let's look at an example of how this work. Suppose that we write an original
array of 16 values as follows.

 7   10    3    2    6    13   15   12   16    4    5    9    14    1   11   8 

Let's just choose the last value (8) as the pivot.

 7   10    3    2    6    13   15   12   16    4    5    9    14    1   11   8 
low                                                                        high
 l                                                                          r 

It scans l forwards until it indexes a value >= 8; it scans r backwards until
it indexes value < 8.

 7   10    3    2    6    13   15   12   16    4    5    9    14    1   11   8 
low   l                                                             r      high

Now it swaps those values.

 7    1    3    2    6    13   15   12   16    4    5    9    14   10   11   8 
low   l                                                             r      high

It scans l forwards until it indexes a value >= 8; it scans r backwards until
it indexes value < 8.

 7    1    3    2    6    13   15   12   16    4    5    9    14   10   11   8 
low                        l                        r                      high

Now it swaps those values.

 7    1    3    2    6     5   15   12   16    4   13    9    14   10   11   8 
low                        l                        r                      high

It scans l forwards until it indexes a value >= 8; it scans r backwards until
it indexes value < 8.

 7    1    3    2    6     5   15   12   16    4   13    9    14   10   11   8 
low                             l              r                           high

Now it swaps those values.

 7    1    3    2    6     5    4   12   16   15   13    9    14   10   11   8 
low                             l              r                           high

It scans l forwards until it indexes a value >= 8; it scans r backwards until
it indexes value < 8 -but stops these indexes when they are equal.

 7    1    3    2    6     5    4   12   16   15   13    9    14   10   11   8 
low                                  l                                     high
                                     r

So, now r=l, so it doesn't swap those values. instead is swaps index l with
index high, putting the pivot after the values smaller than it and at the
beginning of the values greater than or equal to it.

 7    1    3    2    6     5    4    8   16   15   13    9    14   10   11  12
low                                  l                                     high
                                     r

The partitioned array would look like the following (with the pivot in ||).

 7    1    3    2    6     5    4  | 8 | 16   15   13    9    14   10   11  12

The partition method returns 7 (the index of the pivot 8 in the array). Again,
note that values to the left of the pivot are < the value of the pivot and the
values to the right of the pivot are >= the value of the pivot.

You should understand the details of how the partition method works, by hand
simulating it on other 16 element arrays.

Here we were lucky, as 8 was the middle value in the array. As with merging,
partitioning requires a total of O(N) operations to compute all the partitions
needed for each level. If we continue choosing "middle" values as pivots, there
would have been a total of Log2 N levels, just like with MergeSort. Leading to
a best case complexity of O(N Log2 N).

Now we recursively partition the left part (indexes 0 to 6) and right part
(indexes 8 to 15). In both we again choose the last value as the pivot: 4 for
the left range, 12 for the right range; in  both these cases the choices
is fortunate, as these values are near the middle, of each range. After each
range is partitioned, it looks as follows (with the pivots in ||).

2    1    3  | 4 |   6     5    7  | 8 | 11   10    9  |12 |   14   15   16  13

The result is that we still have arrays of size 3, 3, 3, and 4 to partition. If
we keep choosing such good pivots, there would be Log N levels, meaning the
best case complesxity class for QuickSort would be O(N Log2 N): N levels each
requiring O(N) work.

Starting over again, here is an example of an array that would continually
supply the the worst partition choice (the biggest value in the array).

1    2    3    4    5     6    7    8    9   10   11   12    13   14   15   16 

This results in the following array after partitioning

1    2    3    4    5     6    7    8    9   10   11   12    13   14   15  |16|

which has taken 16 operations to partition the array but has not changed it.
Now the recursive calls work on an array of size 15 and of size 0. If we
continue to choose the worst partition, the next recursive call would take 15
operations to partition the array but would not changed it. This would continue
requiring 16 + 15 + 14 + .... + 1 operations, or O(N^2), which is why in the
worst case this method is O(N^2).

Now let's look at the in-between cases, . If partition always leaves 2 values on
the right and the remaininng values on the left (or vice-versa), then there
will be N/2 levels, also yielding O(N^2/2) = O(N^2). Likewise, if partition
always leaves 3 values on the right and the remaininng values on the left (or
vice-versa), then there will be N/3 levels, also yielding O(N^2/3( = O(N^2). In
fact, if partition always leaves M values on the right and the remaininng
values on the left (or vice-versa), then there will be N/M levels, also
yielding O(N^2/M) = O(N^2) since M is constant.

If partition always leaves 1/3 values on the right and the remaininng 2/3
values on the left (or vice-versa), then there will be Log 3/2 N (Log, base 3/2,
of N) yielding O(NLogN) (but to a base less than 2, so the Log to that base
will be bigger: if (3/2)^y = 2^z then y > z). Likewise, if partition always
leaves 1/4 values on the right and the remaininng 3/4 values on the left (or
vice-versa), then there will be Log 4/3 N (Log, base 4/3, of N) yielding
O(NLogN) (but to a base less than 2 or 3/2, so the Log to that base will be
bigger: if (4/3)^x = (3/2)^x = 2^y then x > y > z). In fact, if partition
always leaves 1/M values on the right and (M-1)/ values on the left
(or vice-versa) , then there will be Log M/(M-1) N levels, also yielding
 O(NLogN). How big do the logarithms get.

That is, if the bigger part of the partition array is always 2/3 of the original
size, solving N(2/3)^x = 1 is equivalent to N = (3/2)^x, or taking
Log (base 3/2) of each side, x = Log (base 3/2) N

Here is table of values to illustrate.

  Base |  Log Base of 10^6
-------+-------------------
  2/1  |       20
  3/2  |       34
  4/3  |       48
  5/4  |       62
  6/5  |       76
  7/6  |       90
  8/7  |      103
  9/8  |      117
 10/9  |      131

So, if the partition divides the arrary in 1/2, it will take 20 divisions to
get to an array of size 1. If the partition divides the arrary in 1/3 and 2/3,
it will take 34 divisions to get to an array of size 1....If the partition
divides the arrary in 1/10 and 9/10, it will take 131 divisions to get to an
array of size 1.

So, as long as the partition method leaves a certain percentage of values on
each side of the partition, the algorithm will be O(N Log N).


We summarize this information as follows:

  1) Worst is O(N^2), best and average are O(N Log2 N)
  2) In-place on average case (requires O(Log N) stack space for recursive
       calls) but not in-place in worst case (requires N stack space for
       recursive calls).
  3) O(N^2) comparisons and movement worst case (O(N Log N) and O(N Log N)
       average)
  4) Unstable: partition swaps values over large distances in the array

To summarize, QuickSort's work is between O(N Log2 N) and O(N^2). It can be
much more often O(N Log2 N), and its constant is lower than those for either
HeapSort or MergeSort. The difference between good and bad behavior is
cheaply picking a good pivot (discussed further below).

So, cheaply picking a good pivot is important. Sometimes pivots are choosen
from the start, middle, or end of the array. By choosing the middle, if the
array is already sorted, the pivot will be good (choosing either end will
result in O(N^2) time for a sorted array). One can also choose a pivot from a
random position in the array.  Obviously the best pivot is the median value in
the array, which will split it in half. But it would take too much work (O(N) to
find the true median), over and over again in each call to partition. So, we
can find an approximate median by choosing the pivot as the median of any 3
values in the array to approximate the actual median (picking the first,
middle, last values to compare, or picking three values in random indexes).

Of course, we could better approximate the median by looking at even more
values (say Median of 5), but the time to find such a median is bigger. We
need a tradeoff between how long it takes to choose a pivot and how good the
pivot chosen is. It has been found in practice that Median of 3 gives the
best overall results based on getting close to the median, quickly.

Empirically I found that if we just pick the pivot as the last position in an
array of random integers, on average the largest remaining array size is 75%
(3/4). This value makes sense because the possible sizes of the largest arrays
are 50% (if the median was picked) and 100% (really N-1/N percent) if the
largest or smallest value is picked. When using the median-of-3 as the pivot,
on average the largest remaining array size is 66% (2/3). Finally, when using
the median-of-5 as the pivot, on average the largest remaining array size is
64% (which is only a few percent better that median-of-3, but more expensive
to compute). See the table above for Log (base 3/2) of 10^ 6 = 34, which is
less than 2 times Log (base 2) 10^6, so the average running time will be about
2 times the best running time, which is O(N Log2 N) if the data is random.

With a good pivot, this algorithm also requires only O(Log N) extra stack
space to store data for the recursive calls, which we consider in-place. Unlike
Merge sort, we do all the data movement in the original array.

Finally, to speed up QuickSort, the many small arrays at the bottom of the
recursion are sorted via a faster sort for small arrays, or even not sorted at
all (which is certainly fast)! Say that we leave arrays of size 4 or less
unsorted. After most parts of the array are sorted, we do one call to Insertion
Sort. This method runs in O(N) if the data is mostly sorted (which it will be,
after lots of partitioning: values will be within 4 of the final index) and
doing so is often faster than completly sorting down to arrays of size 1 via
QuickSort. Depending on your machine/compiler, you might discover an optimal
minimal size (that is bigger or smaller) for recursively calling QuickSort.


Final Words on O(N Log2 N) sorting:

The following analysis is based on my implementation of these sorting methods.

HeapSort is guaranteed to run in O(N Log2 N) and typically runs slowest of the
O(N Log2 N) sorts; it CAN be done in place, but it is NOT stable.

MergeSort is guaranteed to run in O(N Log2 N) but typically runs slower than
QuickSort; it CANNOT be done in place (requiring an extra N in space), but it
IS stable.

QuickSort is NOT guaranteed to run in O(N Log2 N) -running O(N^2) is bad
cases, but if we choose the partition carefully, it almost always runs in
O(N Log2 N) and does it faster than MergeSort or HeapSort (with a smaller
constant). It CAN be done in place (for well chosen pivots), using much less
than the extra N space needed by MergeSort. Finally, it is NOT stable.

Recently (2011) a programmer named Tim Peters developed a sorting algorithm
(he named it TimSort) that is based on merge sort and insertion sort. It is
stable, and at worst runs in O(N Log2 N) but often runs faster, sometimes as
fast as O(N), when the data is not completely random, but partially sorted
(which is often the case). It does take up some extra space, but not a lot. To
get this performance the method is highly engineered/tuned and takes lots of
code. But since sorting is done so often, TimSort is now the standard sorting
algorithm in Python (where it was developed) and Java.

There are hundreds of sorting algorithms; The more you know about how your data
is distributed (if it isn't totally random) the better choice of sorting
algorithm you can make. Generally, QuickSort (now TimSort) is built into
libraries with just one sorting method.


Lower Bounds for Comparison Sorting Methods:

Certainly we must look at every value in the array when sorting it (if we
left one out, it might be in the wrong spot). So we have a trivial Omega(N)
lower bound for sorting algorithms when using comparisons. But we can use the
idea of a Comparison Tree to compute a much more interesting and useful lower
bound for sorting using comparisons?

For every comparision-based algorithm that we develop for sorting, we can 
translate it into a Comparison Tree, by looking at which values in the array
it compares to which other values in the array. After a series of comparisons,
we know what swaps to make to sort the array.

Thus, the entire tree specifies how comparisons are made for every possible
input (which is just a different form of a sorting algorithm). Each internal
node of the tree specifies a comparison to make; each leaf shows the order of
all the values derived from the results of the comparisions. Here is a
Comparison Tree for an algorithm that sorts the three values x1, x2, x3. I took
this tree from David Eppstein's ICS 163 Notes (so, you might see a similar
proof again, at a more sophisticated level, when you are more sophisticated).
                
                 x1:x2
                /     \
             < /       \ >
              /         \
          x2:x3        x1:x3
           / \           / \
        < /   \>      < /   \ >
         /     \       /     \
    x1,x2,x3  x1:x3 x2,x1,x3 x2:x3
               / \           / \
            < /   \ >     < /   \ >
             /     \       /     \
      x1,x3,x2 x3,x1,x2  x2,x3,x1 x3,x2,x1

At the root we know nothing about the ordering of x1, x2, and x3. At every
internal node we perform one comparison (different sorting methods do these
comparisons in different orders; some will perform more than the minimum
number). After each comparison we know a bit more about the ordering of the
values. After we accumulate enough information (do enough comparisons on any
path from the root downward), we know the exact ordering of the values.

So, if for example, we follow from the root and if we find that
  x1 < x2, then find that x2 < x3; we now know the complete order: x1 < x2 < x3.

Likewise, if we follow from the root and find that
  x1 < x2, then find that x2 > x3 (we still don't know how x1 and x3 compare
  from these two) then find that x1 < x3 we now know the complete order:
  x1 < x3 < x2.

In the worst case for an input, a Comparison Tree must perform one comparison
for each depth in the tree, and thus in the worst case it performs a number of
comparisons equal to its height. So, if we know the the height of a comparison
tree, the complexity class of its algorithm is equal to its height: there is
some input that requires that many comparisons (although other inputs may
require fewer comparisions: we are still interested in the worst case).

We can use what we know about tree heights to get an interesting bound, by
knowing how many leaves must be in any Comparison Tree.

When sorting an N value array, there are N! (N factorial) different
arrangements of these values. Each arrangement must occur at least once in the
Comparision Tree; so, in the Comparision Tree there are at least N! leaves.

For example, for 3 values, there are 6 different arrangements of values:

  1) x1 < x2 < x3
  2) x1 < x3 < x2
  3) x2 < x1 < x3
  4) x2 < x3 < x1
  5) x3 < x1 < x2
  6) x3 < x2 < x1

all of which occur once in this Comparison Tree.

Note that if there are N different choices for the smallest value, and (N-1)!
arrangements for the remaining values, yielding N*(N-1)! = N! different
arrangements.

Based on a Comparison Tree having at least N! leaves, we can prove that the
height of the Comparison Tree (the number of comparisons performed for the
worst case input) is Omega(N Log2 N).  Here is a chain of inequalities that
allow us to prove this fact.

Note first that each Comparison Tree is a binary tree.

1) A Comparison Tree is a binary tree that has at least N! leaves.

2) A binary tree with N! leaves has more nodes than a binary tree with N!
   nodes - because it must have many internal nodes besides the leaves.

3) The height of a binary tree with N nodes is at least Log2 N.  So a binary
   tree with N! nodes must have a height at least Log2 N!.

4) N! =  N  * (N-1) * (N-2)* (N-3)*....*(N/2) * (N/2-1) * (N/2-2) *....* 2 * 1
   N! > N/2 *  N/2  *  N/2 *  N/2 *....* N/2  *     2   *    2    *....* 2 * 2

   Here we replaced the first N/2 terms by N/2 and replace the second N/2 terms
   by 2. Technically the last replacement is wrong (because 1 < 2) but for large
   N we can find a second factor of 2 in one of the numbers we are replacing by
   2 to get the inequality.

   Thus, N! > (N)^(N/2)      
   Taking Log2 of each side, Log2 N! > N/2 * Log2 N or
     N/2 * Log2 N  < Log2 N!

   so Log2 N! is bounded frrom below by N/2 * Log2N so it is Omega(N Log N)

So, we have
  Height of Comparison Tree (with N! leaves)
    > Heigh of a binary tree  (with N! nodes)
    > Log2 N!
    > N/2 * Log2 N
    which is Omega(N Log N)

  So, for any Comparison Tree that sorts N values, its height must grow at
  least as fast as N Log N. The Worst Case for sorting is the height of the
  tree, so the worst case behavior grows as Omega(N Log2 N) comparisons to find
  the correct ordering  (there is an ordering that requires a number of
  comparisons at least the height of the tree).

Also note that Log2 N! = Log2 1 + Log2 2 + Log2 3 + ... + Log2 N which can
be accurately approximated by integrating Log x dx between 1 and N. Stirling's
approximation for N! is sqrt(2*pi*N)* N^N * e^(-N). As N gets big, e^(-N) gets
very close to 1, so N! is Omega(sqrt(N) * N^N); when taking Logs base e we have
Log N! is Omega (Loge sqrt(N) + N Loge N - N) or just Omega(N Loge N), by
dropping the sqrt and linear terms, which we can do for lower bounds since
N LogeN < N Log2N + other terms.

Since we know sorting with comparisons is Omega(N Log N) and we have multiple
algorithms that are O(N Log N) -HeapSort and MergeSort- we have "optimally
solved" the sorting problem - at least according to its complexity class. Other
algorithms based on comparisons might have smaller constants (which affect the
actual speed), but none will be in a smaller complexity class in the worst case.

Next we will examine two sorting algorithms that seem to violate this lower
bound, but they do so by not using comparisons to sort their values! These are
strange algorithms, that are useful for certain kinds of data and have 
interesting upper and lower bounds that we will explore in more detail (and
see that they don't really violate the lower bound)
