		Linked Lists and Linked List Processing


Introduction:

This lecture reviews the basics of linked lists and linked list processing. You
are expected to understand how to draw linked lists (both full and abbreviated
pictures), how to update the drawings by hand simulating code that operates on
linked lists (which is especially useful for debugging linked list code that
you write), how to process linked lists by iterating over/traversing them (in a
variety of ways), how add values at the front and rear of a linked list, how to
search for and remove a value from a linked list, and how to copy a linked list
efficiently.

Here we use the term "linked list" to refer to what more formally be called a
"linear linked list". In the next lecture we will examine simple linked list
variants and their uses: circular lists, header/trailer lists, and doubly-linked
lists. In that lecture we will also discuss using references and pointers to
pointers in linked list processing. In a third lecture we will examine how
linked lists are defined and processed recursively.


Linked List Basics:

We will start by looking at a simple templated class named LN, which we use to
represent List Nodes in a linearly-linked list: each LN<T> object points to
another LN<T> object from that same class (the one that follows it in the list)
-or to nothing (meaning this object is at the end of the list), represented by
nullptr.

This class declares two public instance variables, instead of private ones with
accessor/setter methods: in this generic class, the setters would allow any
value to be stored there, so setters aren't of much use (and would increase the
syntactic complexity of writing code to process LNs). It also declares one
default and copy constructor and another useful constructor (also both public).

template<class T>
class LN {
  public:
    LN ()                               : next(nullptr){}
    LN (const LN<T>& ln)                : value(ln.value), next(ln.next){}
    LN (const T& v, LN<T>* n = nullptr) : value(v), next(n){}

    T      value;
    LN<T>* next;
};

Although not universally agreed upon, I think this style (public instance
variables) is easier to write code for, avoiding the extra syntax of doing
method calls to examine and set these instance variables. Also, we often 
declare classes like LN<T> to be nested classes inside another class (as we will
in the linked-list implementations of data types in Programming Assignment #2),
and therefore they can be manipulated only by the code in the outer class.

We will examine an Object/Variable picture of a linked list built from this
class, and a simplified picture that represents all the necessary information,
but more compactly (if a bit more ambiguously). You should be able think in
terms of both the full and abbreviated pictures.

Given such pictures, we should be able to understand how such data structures
are accessed when using combinations of ->value and ->next; e.g., in the linked
list shown, what is the type and value of x->next->next->value or x->next->next?
What would happen if these appeared as lvalues (on the left hand side of an =): 
  x->next->next->value = 10;
  x->next->next        = nullptr;

Every occurence of "->name" means "(a) follow the pointer before the arrow to
the object that it refers to and (b) focus on the instance variable/box for
that "name" (which might store a pointer to follow later). So, x->next both
stores a value and is a location in which we can store a value. The -> operator
is called "member access".

The * operator is also used with pointers too, but less often than -> is used.
Every occurence of "*" means just "follow the pointer before the arrow to the
object that it refers to", which is just the first part of the -> operator.
If we use *, we will typically process that whole object, or we then use the
. (dot) operator to focus on the the instance variable/box for a name. The *
operator is called indirection/dereference.

In fact, (*x).value has the same meaning as x->value, so we often use the
simpler x->value form, rather than the (*x).value form. Because . has higher
precedence over *, we must use these parentheses.

I have found that many students are just "faking" an understanding of how
linked lists are accessed and updated. They really don't understand all the
material in the previous paragraph, or how code accesses and mutates linked
lists. They don't follow my recommendations to practice hand-simulating linked
list code, so they ultimately have a very hard time writing (and debugging)
their linked list code.


Iterating over Linked Lists:

We will examine the concept of "cursors" and how they unify the processing
of arrays (where cursors are ints) and linked lists (where cursors are
pointers, which are actually like ints that point to memory locations): in each
case the cursor (a small piece of data) tells "where we are focussed" in a
large data structure. With both we can use a standard "for" loop for traversing
the entire data structure (focusing on each piece of data in the data structure,
one after the other). Iterators really keep track of cursors for a data
structure as they traverse it.

  array       x: for (int       i=0; i<length  ; ++i      ) ...access x[i]
  linked list x: for (LN<...>*  p=x; p!=nullptr; p=p->next) ...access p->value

We will closely examine what p = p->next means, and more generally what it
means to copy any pointer value into a pointer variable.

  For the statement "p1 = p2;" the magic words are: "Make the box storing
  variable p1 refer refer to the same object that the box for the variable p2
  refers to." Note that if p2 stores nullptr (refers to no object) then nullptr
  should be stored in p1 too (so that it also refers to no object).

  A statement like p1->next = p2; is interpreted very similarly, but here the
  box on the left side of the = is an instance variable in the object p1 refers
  to. So this assignment statement says "Make the box storing p1->next (which is
  the instance variable "next" in the object variable p1 refers to) refer to
  the same object that the box for the variable p2 refers to.

Of course, what the assignment "p1 = p2;" really does is copy the integer that
is the pointer p2 into p1. The integer refers to the memory address of the
object. But it is better at the beginning to ignore memory addresses and show
pointers as arrows. Later, C++ references (i.e. &) make these pictures tougher
to draw and interpret (but we will do both; and both help us understand and
debug the code we write).

While the semantics of pointer assignments is not really complicated once you
"get the hang of it", many students don't take the time to "get the hang of it".
Such a misunderstanding makes it difficult to write and debug code (by hand
simulation) that uses linked lists. There is little I want you to learn by rote
this quarter, but learn these words by rote.

Note that after p1 = p2; the test p1 == p2 evaluates to true: both variables
refer to the same object. So, of course *p1 == *p2 is also true, because the
state of the object p1 refers to is the same as the state of the object p2
refers to: because they refer to the same object! And typically == on objects
(not pointers) computes whether the objects have the same state: their instance
variables store the same values. So == on pointers is like Python's "is"
operator and == on dereferenced pointers is like Pythons == operator.

Here are a series of code fragments/functions the process linked lists. All of
the examples in this lecture use LN<int> for simplicity. Most interesting
details of linked procesing concerns the use of "next" not "value". Computing
the length of a linked list (example 3) doesn't concern "value" at all. All of
these operations traverse the linked list (visiting every LN). Almost all use
the same for loop: which is similar to doing each of these operations on an
array, with an integer index rather than a pointer as a cursor.

Assumes we have defined

  LN<int>* l
    +---+   +-------+   +-------+   +-------+   +-------+   
    | --+-->| 5 | --+-->| 2 | --+-->| 7 | --+-->| 4 | / |
    +---+   +-------+   +-------+   +-------+   +-------+   


(1) Traverse a linked list, computing the sum of its <int> values.

If you truly understand how/why this code works, at the microscopic level, you
are 70% of the way to a good understanding of linked lists. See the Picture
link on the website showing all the changes to p and sum that occur when
executing this code.

  int sum = 0;
  for (LN<int>* p = l; p != nullptr; p = p->next)
    sum += p->value;
  std::cout << "Sum = " << sum << std::endl;

It computes the value 18 for the list above.


(2) Traverse a linked lists inserting each value on an output stream (with
"->" between values, ending in nullptr); this is shown as overloading
operator <<.

  template<class T>
  std::ostream& operator << (std::ostream& outs, LN<T>* l) {
    for (LN<T>* p = l; p != nullptr; p = p->next)
      outs << p->value << "->";
    outs << "nullptr";
    return outs;
}

std::cout << l; prints "5->2->7->4->nullptr" for the list above. We might use
a function like this one for the str method defined for a linked list
implementation of a data type.


(3) Traverse a linked list computing its length: the number of LN<T> objects
reachable.

template<class T>
int length (LN<T>* l) {
  int answer = 0;
  for (LN<T>* p = l; p != nullptr ; p = p->next)
    ++answer;
  return answer;
}

length(l) returns 4 for the list above. To computes .size() for an array
implementation of a data type, we must store the "used" in the array; but for
linked lists we can compute this value (although caching it can be much faster
for a long linked list and doesn't waste much space).


(4) Traverse a linked list computing how often a certain value occurs.

template<class T>
int count_occurences (LN<T>* l, T to_count) {
  int answer = 0;
  for (LN<T>* p = l; p !=nullptr ; p = p->next)
    if (p->value == to_count)
      ++answer;
  return answer;
}

count_occurrences(l,2) returns 1 for the list above.


(5) Traverse a linked list computing whether or not it is in a sorted order
(recall that empty lists and lists with one value are sorted). Sorted here
means that the values are in non-decreasing order: subsequent values stay the
same or get larger. For this function to compile/work correcly, operator> must
be defined on type T. Algorithmically (after checking for a list of length 0 or
1), it checks whether any values are "out of order" and if so, returns false;
if there are no "out of order" values it returns true;

template<class T>
bool is_sorted (LN<T>* l) {
  if (l == nullptr || l->next == nullptr) //Shortcircuit || is critical here
    return true;

  T prev = l->value;
  for (LN<T>* p = l->next;  p != nullptr;  prev = p->value, p = p->next)
    if (prev > p->value)
      return false;
  return true;
}

is_sorted(l) returns false for the list above.

Recall that || is a short-circuit boolean operator: if the first condition is
true, then the value of the entire boolean expression is known to be true, so
the second condition isn't even tested; if it were tested, it would crash the
program (see below), because l->next cannot be computed when l stores nullptr
(the "follow the pointer to the object it points to" part fails, because it
points to no object). Thus, the order in which the conditions are tested is
very important to the test working correctly.

Actually, we can simplify the code as

template<class T>
bool is_sorted (LN<T>* l) {
  if (l == nullptr)
    return true;

  T prev = l->value;
  for (LN<T>* p = l->next;  p != nullptr;  prev = p->value, p = p->next)
    if (prev > p->value)
      return false;
  return true;
}

Here, if l->next is nullptr, the for loop executes 0 times, returning true
(whereas the code above never reaches the loop).

We can write this code without the temporary, by using the single pointer p
to refer to a value (p->value) that is compared with the value following it in
the the linked list (p->next->value). We should execute this test in the body
of the loop only if p->next is not nullptr.

template<class T>
bool is_sorted2 (LN<T>* l) {
  if (l == nullptr)
    return true;

  for (LN<T>* p = l; p->next != nullptr; p = p->next)
    if (p->value > p->next->value)
      return false;
  return true;
}

All these traversals (except the last) are written with simple and similar
list-processing code. When we write code that processes a linked list, we
should be able to prove that every time that we write "p->" inside the loop's
body, then p is not nullptr (i.e., that p really points to some object). The
typical continuation condition in a for loop that processes a linked list (the
test: p!=nullptr) guarantees that the body of the loop can contain "p->"
because the body is executed only if p is not nullptr. Likewise, in the last
code fragment above, the continuation condition is p->next != nullptr, because
the body refers to p->next->value.

If we ever execute "p->...." when p stores nullptr, the C++ program does not
throw an exception: it crashes. On Windows I get a popup window saying that
...exe has stopped working. To ensure maximum speed, C++ does not check that
a pointer if nullptr before following it; Python and Java do, and therefore
throw an exception that can be caught and handled. When a nullptr is followed
in C++, it causes the program to terminate by crashing. So, C++ runs code more
quickly, but when the code is incorrect can crash the program with little useful
information about why.

Recall that C++ has the following "conditional expression" syntax. Actually, the
() are not required, but they are useful to contain this conditional expression
when other operators apply to the value of the condition expression.

  (boolean expression ? ValueIfTrue : ValueIfFalse)

Conditional "expressions" are sometimes a shorter and simpler to understand
version of a conditional "statement": the if statement. Often a question arises
about which is "faster": I don't know, but they probably run at about the same
speed. The benefit of a conditional expression derives from whether it
simplifies the code or not, compared to an "if statement" which is the typical
alternative. Note that expressions compute values; statements execute,
typically causing state-changes.


Building Lists:

We will now write code to add a value to the front of a list and at the rear of
a list. In this way we can build any list we want, with the values in any order.
Inserting a new LN at the front of a linked list moves every node back by one
in the linked list, without changing any other pointers. Inserting a node at the
rear of a linked list requires traversing the list, skipping until we point to
the last LN, and then appending a new LN after it. Of course, we can always
cache a pointer to the last node in a non-empty list, to access it immediately.

Constrast the code below with adding a new value at the front and rear of an
array (assuming we need to retain the order of the values). For a list, we can
add a LN at the front by changing one pointer; for an array we must first move
every value in the array to the next higher index, opening up index 0 in which
we put the new value.

The code to add a node storing some_value at the front of LN<int>* x; is just

  x = new LN<int>(some_value, x);

This code works whether x refers to an empty list (stores nullptr) or whether x
stores a pointer to the first node in a list with any number of values following
it. Paraphrased, x now refers to a new node storing the value some_value, whose
next instance variable points to the list that x originally pointed to. Draw
some examples of lists (empty and not) and hand simulate this code on them to
ensure you completely understand it. Yes, I really mean this.Serious, I really
do mean it.

I still mean it. If you haven't done this do it now.

The opposite is true for adding at the rear of a linked list/array data
structure: for a linked list, we must skip over every node starting from the
front of the list to find the rear node of the list; for an array we typically
know the index of the last value and put the new value one beyond the end, so
we do not have to examine any other values in the array. Of coure, if the
length of the array is not big enough to include another value at its end, we
must construct a new array with a larger length and copy all the original array
values to it.

In fact, for adding a value at the rear of a linked list, we need two cases.
If the list is empty, we must store the new pointer in x (in this case the
rear becomes the front too); if the list is not empty, we must store the new
pointer in the ->next instance variable of the node currently at the rear of
the list (the node whose ->next stores nullptr). This code is

  if (x == nullptr)
    x = new LN<int>(some_value); //Default argument for 2nd parameter is nullptr
  else {
    LN<int>* p = x;
    for (; p->next != nullptr; p = p->next)  or	while (p->next!=nullptr)
      {}					  p = p->next;
    p->next = new LN<int>(some_value);
  }

Notice two important things about the code in the else block

  1. We must declare p before/outside the for loop, because we use it
     after the for loop terminates (outside the loop). Variables declared
     inside a loop can be accessed only by code in the loop body.

  2. We terminate the for loop when p refers to the LAST NODE in the linked
     list; the last node is the only one whose ->next is nullptr. In this case
     we DO NOT stop when p == nullptr (as we did for all the query code); that
     would mean p has gone too far: we have run off the linked list and have
     lost the pointer to the last node, which we are trying to change, by
     making its next refer to a new node. We stop when p refers to the last
     node in the list, the unique node whose ->next is nullptr.

We could also write the else clause as follows, declaring p inside the loop,
and updating it in the loop body before breaking out of the loop.

  else
    for (LN<int>* p = x; /*see body for explicit temination*/; p = p->next)
      if (p->next == nullptr) {
        p->next = new LN<int>(some_value);
        break;
      }

We could encapsulate these code fragments into functions and then call either
x = add_front(x,some_value); or  x = add_rear(x,some_value); in both cases it
is critical to store the returned value in x, because if x is empty (stores
nullptr) unless we store a value into x it will not change (but we will see how
to use & references to solve this problem for functions in the next lecture).

template<class T>
LN<T>* add_front(LN<T>* l, const T& value) { //O(1)
  return new LN<T>(value,l);
}

template<class T>
LN<T>* add_rear(LN<T>* l, const T& value) {  //O(N)
  if (l == nullptr)
    return new LN<T>(value); //Default argument for 2nd parameter is nullptr

  for (LN<T>* p = l; /*see body for explicit termination*/; p = p->next)
    if (p->next == nullptr) {
      p->next = new LN<T>(value);
      break;
    }
  return l;
}

or

template<class T>
LN<T>* add_rear(LN<T>* l, const T& value) {
  if (l == nullptr)
    return new LN<T>(value); //Default argument for 2nd parameter is nullptr

  LN<T>* p = l;
  for (/*See above*/; p->next != nullptr; p = p->next) //  or  while (p->next != nullptr)
    {}                                                 //         p = p->next;
  p->next = new LN<T>(value);

  return l;
}

Here is a simple (but slow) function that puts the code above into a simple
loop to store all the values in an array into a linked list, presering the
order, by using add_rear. We could write a simlar function to read the values
from a file.

template<class T>
LN<T>* build_linked_list_simple(T values[], int length) {
  if (length == 0)
    return nullptr;

  LN<T>* front;
  for (int i=0; i<length; ++i)
    front = add_rear(front,values[i]);

  return front;
}

This process repeated calls add_rear, which requires the code to traverse
the entire linked list every time a new value is stored at the rear;
mathematically, if the array stores 1,000 values, when building the linked list
we will have to scan approximately 500,000 nodes (that number of values squared,
divided by 2: we skip 0 nodes to add the first value, 1 node to add the second
value, 2 nodes to add the third, value, ...  and 999 nodes to add the 1000th
value; so we skip 0 + 1 + 2 + ... + 999 nodes) which is slow: O(N**2). We can
speed up adding values via caching, discussed next.

Aside: we could iterate through the array BACKWARDS, and add each value at the
FRONT of the linked list we are building, to get the right order. Doing so
takes O(N) time. we could not use "going backwards" in our solution of copying
a linked list (but we can use caching).

We briefly discussed caching when we discussed the size method in the ArraySet
class. Caching is a classic "space for time" tradeoff: we use extra space to
store (and update) a precomputed value so that we don't have to recompute it.
In ArraySet, we stored the instance variable used, so the size method can just
return this value; it doesn't have to count the number of values stored in the
array each time we need to compute the size. Whenever we add or remove a value
from the array, the code incremented/decremented this counter.

Likewise, we often cache the size of a list implementing a data type (rather
than scanning the list to compute the size). If we need to repeatedly add a
value at the rear of a linked list, we can also cache a pointer to the last
node in the linked list, so we can quickly add a new node at the rear (and then
the new node becomes the new rear). With such a cached value we never have to
traverse the linked list to find its last node; we've already precomputed it
each time we need it, and update it when it changes.

Here is a variation of the "build_linked_list_simple" function that accomplish
the same result but more more efficiently. 

template<class T>
LN<T>* build_linked_list_fast(T values[], int length) {
  if (length == 0)
    return nullptr;

  LN<T>* front      = new LN<T>(values[0]); //length != 0 so at least one value
  LN<T>* rear_cache = front;

  for (int i=1; i<length; ++i)
    rear_cache = rear_cache->next = new LN<T>(values[i]);

  return front;
}

Notice that rear_cache = rear_cache->next = new LN<T>(values[i]); uses a
chained = to extend the linked list with a new node: the new node is now the
only one in the linked list whose ->next is nullptr, and rear_cache refers to
it, and extends the linked list on the next iteration by storing something new
into its next. We could accomplish these two action by two statements

    rear_cache->next = new LN<T>(values[i]);
    rear_cache = rear_cache->next;

but they would have to be executed in this order (why?)

In build_linked_list_fast, each loop iteration requires just a constant amount
of work, O(1), so building an N node linked list is N*O(1) =  O(N).

The build_linked_list_fast function cries out to be hand simulated on a small
example.

Finally, if we are inside a Queue implementation that stores a linked list
using the instance variable "front", as well as a cache instance variable
"rear", we can easily enqueue a value at the rear by using the following code.
By using "front" and "rear" we have covered both hot-spots in a Queue: the 
front where values are dequeued and the rear where values are enqueued.

int enqueue (const T& element) {
  if (front == nullptr)
    front = rear = new LN<T> (element,nullptr);
  else
    rear = rear->next = new LN<T>(element,nullptr);

  ...other code
}

Linked list processing isn't easy, so you should check the code you write by
doing small hand simulations of it, in a few different situations. Following
this advice will improve your ability to hand simulate linked list code quickly
and improve your ability to debug linked list code. We will spend some time
simulating the following code. It is not obvious what it does, but we should be
able to update the picture by executing this code to learn what it does. Doing
so quickly and accurately proves that we have a good understanding of the
basics of linked lists.

Assume LN<int>* x and x points to a linked list with 4 or 5 values.

  LN<int>* answer = nullptr;
  while (x != nullptr) {
    LN<int>* to_move  = x;
    x                 = x->next;
    to_move->next     = answer;
    answer            = to_move; 
  }
    
  x = answer;


More Linked List Processing:

(1) The following function searches an unordered linked list looking for a 
specified value. We use just the standard for loop to traverse it, and return a
pointer to the first node found that contains the searched-for value (there may
be many such nodes with that value). Note that we use nullptr just as we use -1
when returning array indexes: it means the value was not found.

template<class T>
LN<T>* find (LN<T>* l, T to_find) {
  for (LN<T>* p = l; p != nullptr; p = p->next)
    if (p->value == to_find)
       return p;

  return nullptr;
}

For an ordered linked list (assume an ordering of values smallest to largest)
we can also stop and report a failure as soon as we examine a value strictly
greater than the one that we are searching to find (or, of course, if we run
out of nodes to examine). The continuation condition in the resulting for loop
is more complicated, but it can terminate more quickly (without examining every
value in the linked list, unlike in the case of an unordered list).

template<class T>
LN<T>* find (LN<T>* l, T to_find) {
  for (LN<T>* p = l; p != nullptr && p->value <= to_find; p = p->next)
    if (p->value == to_find)
       return p;

  return nullptr;
}

Notice that the continuation condition is that both (a) p != nullptr, and
(b) p->value <= to_find. Recall that && is a short-circuit boolean operator:
if the first condition is false, then the value of the entire boolean
expression is known to be false, so the second condition isn't even tested; if
it were tested, it would crash the program, because p->value cannot be computed
when p stores nullptr. Thus, the order in which the conditions are tested is
very important to the test working correctly.


(2) The following function removes from a linked list the first node storing a 
specified value. What is most interesting here is that when we remove a node,
we must change the ->next instance variable in the node BEFORE the one that we 
are removing: If (see the picture) we remove the node storing the value 7, then
we must change the ->next in the node storing the value 2, making its ->.next
refer to the node containing 4 (the ->next in the node storing the value 7)
Thus, if we now follow the links, we visit nodes storing 5 then 2 then 4.

There are two basic approaches to solving this "node before" problem: the first
uses look-ahead: a single pointer that checks values "one after" the node it
currently points to; when it finds the node to remove one ahead, it changes the
->next in the node to which it points. That code is

template<class T>
LN<T>* remove_lookahead (LN<T>* l, T to_remove) {
  if (l == nullptr)
    return nullptr;

  if(l->value == to_remove) {
    LN<T>* to_delete = l;
    l = l->next;
    delete to_delete;
  }else{
    for (LN<T>* p = l; p->next != nullptr; p = p->next)
      if (p->next->value == to_remove) {
        LN<T>* to_delete = p->next;
        p->next = p->next->next;
        delete to_delete;
        break;
      }
  }

  return l;
}

As with add_front and add_rear functions, this remove function returns a
pointer to the head of the list in which the removal occurred. It should be
called like x = remove_lookahead(x,value);

As with the code for adding at the rear of a list, there is a special case for
(a) an empty linked list (l == nullpt) and here there is a special case for
(b) for removing a value that happens to be the first value in a linked list.
Note that we explicitly delete (recycle the storage for) the LN<T> containing
the to_remove value.

Try hand simulating this code on an empty list, and a 5 node linked list,
removing the first, last, and some middle value. Especially interesting is the
code

  p->next = p->next->next;

which says put into the next field in the node p refers to, whatever is in
the next field of the node coming after the node that p refers to; this removes
from the linked list the node after the one p refers to.

The second approach to solving this "node before" problem is to use an extra
variable: p to traverse through the nodes in the linked list looking for the
node with the value to remove, and a second variable (prev) that remembers where
the first one "just was" (sometimes called a ghost pointer). It is the ->next
field in the node referred to by this prev variable that is changed.

template<class T>
LN<T>* remove_ghost (LN<T>* l, T to_remove) {
  if (l == nullptr)
    return nullptr;

  if(l->value == to_remove) {
    LN<T>* to_delete = l;
    l = l->next;
    delete to_delete;
  }else{
    LN<T>* prev = l;
    for (LN<T>* p = l->next;  p != nullptr;  prev = p, p = p->next)
      if (p->value == to_remove) {
        prev->next = p->next;
        delete p;
        break;
      }
  }

  return l;
}
  
Notice the initialization and update part of the for (...) initializes/updates
two pointers, not just one (the is_sorted function used this double update
too; in fact the first version of is_sorted used something like a ghost
pointer; the second version used a lookahead pointer). The variable prev always
refers to the node one before the variable p refers to. Note that we delete
(recycle the storage for) the LN<T> containing the to_remove value.


(3) The following function copies an N node linked list in O(N), by caching the
rear of the list (as we did in build_linked_list_fast). note that we do not
copy the value stored in the linked list, but create a new link list that
shares those values.

template<class T>
LN<T>*  copy (LN<T>* l) {
  if (l == nullptr)
    return nullptr;

  LN<T>* front      = new LN<T>(l->value);  //Guaranteed to exist: l != nullptr
  LN<T>* rear_cache = front;

  for (l = l->next; l != nullptr; l = l->next)
    rear_cache = rear_cache->next = new LN<T>(l->value);

  return front;
}


(4) The following function determines whether two linked lists store the same
values in the same order. It requires traversing both linked lists
simultaneously (stopping when either is exhausted): any unequal values mean the
linked lists are unequal; and if one is exhausted before the other, they are
unequal. Said another way, they are equal if they have the same size and all
the same values in the same order.

template<class T>
bool equals (LN<T>* l1, LN<T>* l2) {
  for (; l1 != nullptr && l2 != nullptr; l1 = l1->next, l2 = l2->next)
    if (l1->value != l2->value)
      return false;

  return l1 == nullptr && l2 == nullptr;
}

In the next lecture we will see how & references can simplify writing some of
the linked list processing code written here. Java does not support & references
so the code here is as simple as Java linked list processing code gets. In the
next lecture we will also learn about some special kinds of linked lists (not
linear linked lists): circular linked lists, header/trailer linked lists, and
doubly linked lists.

In a third lecture we will examine recursion and see how linked lists are
defined and processed recursively. Suprisingly, once you get the hang of
writing recursive functions, they are often easier to write than iterative ones.

Later, when we study sorting, we will see algorithms that work well for sorting
array and linked list representations of data.
