<html><head><!-- This document was created from RTF source by rtftohtml version
2.7.5 --><title>Actor Network Theory and 
Classification</title></head><body bgcolor = "ffffff"><h2>How things
(actor-net)work: Classification, magic and the ubiquity of standards </h2><p>
<b></b><p>
<b></b>Geoffrey C. Bowker <p>
Susan Leigh Star <p>
Graduate School of Library and Information Science <p>
University of Illinois at Urbana-Champaign <p>
<p>
November 18, 1996<p>
<p>
<i>to appear in a special issue of Philosophia</i><p>
<p>
<i>INTRODUCTION</i> 	<p>
<p>
"<i>A classified and hierarchically ordered set of pluralities, of variants,
has none of the sting of the miscellaneous and uncoordinated plurals of our
actual world</i>." (Dewey, 1989:  49)<p>
	<p>
	"We do many things today that a few hundred years ago would have looked like
magic".  We all know versions of this banal assertion - we've probably all made
it ourselves at some point or another.  And if we don't understand a given
technology it looks like magic: we are perpetually surprised by the mellifluous
tones read off our favorite CDs by (we believe) a laser. Star (1995b) notes
that even engineers black box and think of technology `as if by magic' in their
everyday practical dealings with machines.  A common description of a good
waiter or butler (one thinks of Jeeves in the Wodehouse stories) is that she
clears a table `as if by magic'.   Are these two kinds of magic or one or
none?<p>
<p>
	The following paper is an attempt to answer this question, which can be posed
more prosaically as: 	 	<p>
*	What work do classifications and standards do?  We want to look at what goes
into making things work like magic: making them fit together so that we can buy
a radio built by someone we  have never met in Japan, plug it into a wall in
Champaign and hear the world news from the BBC.   	<p>
*	Who does that work?  We want to explore the fact that all this magic involves
much work: there is a lot of hard labor in effortless ease<a
href="actnet_fn.html#fn0">[1]</a>.   Such invisible work is often not only
underpaid - it is severely underrepresented in theoretical literature (Star and
Strauss, in press). We will discuss where all the `missing work' that makes
things look magical goes.  	<p>
*	What happens to the cases that don't fit?  We want to draw attention to cases
that don't fit easily into our created world of standards and classifications:
the left handers in the world of right-handed magic, chronic disease sufferers
in the world of allopathic acute medicine, the onion-hater in MacDonalds (Star,
1991b) and so forth. <p>
<p>
	These are issues of great epistemological, political and ethical import.  It
is easy to get lost in Baudrillard's (1990) cool memories of simulacra.  The
hype of our times is that we don't need to think about the work any more: the
real issues are scientific and technological - in artificial life, thinking
machines, nanotechnology, genetic manipulation... Clearly each of these
<i>are</i> important.  However, we endeavor to demonstrate that there is rather
more at stake - epistemologically, politically and ethically - in the day to
day work of building classification system and producing and maintaining
standards than in these philosophical high-fliers.   The pyrotechnics may hold
our fascinated gaze; they cannot provide any path to answering our questions.
<p>
	Through looking at classification systems and standards, we will move towards
an understanding of the stuff which makes up the networks of actor network
theory. Latour, Callon and others within the actor-network approach have
developed an array of concepts in order to describe the development and
operation of technoscience.  Their valuable concepts include:  regimes of
delegation; the centrality of mediation; and the position that nature and
society are not causes but consequences of human scientific and technical work.
The position that a fact may be seen as a consequence, and not as an
antecedent, is axiomatic to the American pragmatist approach as well,
particularly in the work of John Dewey (e.g., Dewey, 1929).    As he noted in
his <i>Experience and Nature: </i><p>
<i></i><p>
For things are objects to be treated, used, acted upon and with, enjoyed and
endured, even more than things to be known.  They are things HAD before they
are things cognized....the isolation of traits characteristic of objects known,
and then defined as the sole ultimate realities, accounts for the denial to
nature of the characters which make things lovable and contemptible, beautiful
and ugly, adorable and awful.  It accounts for the belief that nature is an
indifferent, dead mechanism; it explains why characteristics that are the
valuable and valued traits of objects in actual experience are thought to
creative a fundamentally troublesome philosophical problem. (1989 [1925]:  p.
21)<p>
<i></i><p>
<i></i>We draw attention here to the places where the work gets done of
assuring that delegation and mediation will work: to the places where human and
non-human are constructed to be operationally and analytically equivalent.  And
following both Dewey and Latour, we also question the indifference -- of
nature, and of machines.  So doing, we explore the political and ethical
dimensions of actor-network theory, restoring the interlinked and webbed
relationships between people, things, and infrastructure. <p>
<p>
<i>TWO DEFINITIONS</i> 	<p>
	We will take a `classification' to be a spatial, temporal or spatio-temporal
segmentation of the world.  A `classification system' is a set of boxes,
metaphorical or not, into which things can be put in order to then do some kind
of work - bureaucratic or knowledge production.  We will not demand of a
classification system that it has properties such as: <p>
*	the operation of consistent classificatory principles (for example being
solely a <i>genetic</i> classification (Tort, 1989) classifying things by their
origin); <p>
*	mutual exclusivity of categories; <p>
*	completeness (total coverage of the world being described). <p>
No working classification system that we have looked at meets these `simple'
requirements and we doubt that any ever could (Desrosi&egrave;res and Thevenot,
1988).   <p>
	For example, consider the International Classification of Diseases, which will
be one of our major examples throughout this paper.  The full title of the
current (10th) edition of the ICD, is: "ICD-10 - International Statistical
Classification of Diseases and Related Health Problems; Tenth Revision".   Note
that it is designated a `statistical' classification. By this is meant that
only diseases which are statistically significant are to be entered in (it is
not an attempt to classify all disease).  It calls itself a `classification',
even though many have said that it is a `nomenclature' since it has no single
classificatory principle (it has at least four; which are not mutually
exclusive (Bowker and Star, 1994).  In many cases it represents a compromise
between conflicting schemes:  "The terms used in categories C82-C85 for
non-Hodgkin's lymphomas are those of the Working Formulation, which attempted
to find common ground among several major classification systems.  The terms
used in these schemes are not given in the Tabular List but appear in the
Alphabetical Index; exact equivalence with the terms appearing in the Tabular
List is not always possible". (ICD-10, 1, 215).  However, it presents itself
clearly as a classification scheme and not a nomenclature.  Since 1970, there
has been an effort underway by the World Health Organization to build a
distinct International Nomenclature of Diseases, whose main purpose will be to
provide: "a single recommended name for every disease entity" (ICD-10, 1, 25).
The point here is that we want to take a broad enough definition so that
anything that is consistently called a classification system can be included.
If we took a purist view, the ICD would be a nomenclature and who knows what
the IND would be.  With a broad definition we can look at the work that is
involved in building and maintaining a family of entities that people call
classification systems - rather than attempt the Herculean, Sisyphian task of
purifying the (un)stable systems in place.  Howard Becker makes the point here:
"Epistemology has been a ... negative discipline, mostly devoted to saying what
you shouldn't do if you want your activity to merit the title of science, and
to keeping unworthy pretenders from successfully appropriating it.  The
sociology of science, the empirical descendant of epistemology, gives up trying
to decide what should and shouldn't count as science, and tells what people who
claim to be doing science do..." (1996: 54-55). <p>
	We will take a `standard' to be any set of agreed-upon rules for the
production of (textual or material) objects.  There are a number of histories
of standards which point to the development and maintenance of standards as
being a key to industrial production.  Thus, as David Turnbull points out, it
was possible to build a cathedral like Chartres without standard
representations (blueprints) and standard building materials (regular sizes for
stones, tools etc.) (1993).  However it is not possible to build a modern
housing development without them: too much needs to come together -
electricity, gas, sewer, timber sizes, screws, nails and so on.  The control of
standards is a central, often underanalyzed (but see the work of Paul David -
for example David and Rothwell, 1994 - for a rich treatment) feature of
economic life.  They are key to knowledge production as well - Latour (1987)
speculates that far more economic resources are spent creating and maintaining
standards than in producing `pure' science.  Key dimensions of standards are:
<p>
*	They are often deployed in the context of making things work together -
computer protocols for Internet communication involve a cascade of standards
(cf. Abbate and Kahin, 1995) which need to work together well in order for the
average user to gain seamless access to the web of information.  There are
standards for the components to link from your computer to the phone network,
for coding and decoding binary streams as sound, for sending messages from one
network to another, for attaching documents to messages and so forth; 	<p>
*	They are often enforced by legal bodies - be these professional
organizations; manufacturers' organizations or the State. We can say tomorrow
that volap&uuml;k (a universal language that boasted some 23 journals in 1889<a
href="actnet_fn.html#fn1">[2]</a>) or its successor Esperanto shall henceforth
be the standard language for international diplomacy; without a mechanism of
enforcement we shall probably fail.   	<p>
*	There is no natural law that the best (technically superior) standard shall
win - the QWERTY keyboard, Lotus 123, DOS and VHS are often cited in this
context.  Standards have significant inertia, and can be very difficult to
change. <p>
<p>
		Classifications and standards are two sides of the same coin.  The
distinction between them (as we are defining them) is that classifications are
containers for the descriptions of events - they are an aspect of
organizational, social and personal memory - whereas standards are procedures
for how to do things - they are an aspect of acting in the world.  Every
successful standard imposes a classification system.<p>
<p>
<i>UNDERSTANDING CLASSIFYING AND STANDARDIZING</i> 	<p>
	This  paper will offer four major themes for understanding classifying,
standardizing (and the related processes of formalizing) and their politics and
histories.  Each theme operates as a gestalt switch - it comes in the form of
an infrastructural inversion (Bowker, 1994).  Inverting our commonsense notion
of infrastructure means taking what have often been seen as behind the scenes,
boring, background processes to the real work of politics and knowledge
production<a href="actnet_fn.html#fn1">[3]</a> and bringing their contribution
to the foreground.   The first two, ubiquity and material texture,  speak to
the <i>space </i> of actor-networks; the second two, the indeterminate past and
the practical politics, speak to their <i>time</i>.  Taken together, they
sketch out features of the historically creation of the infrastructure which
(ever partially, ever incompletely) orders the world in such a way that
actor-network theory becomes a reasonable description. <p>
<p>
	The first major theme is seeing the <b>ubiquity</b> of classifying and
standardizing. Classification schemes and standards literally saturate the
worlds we live in.  This saturation is furthermore intertwined, or webbed
together.  While it is possible to pull out a single classification scheme or
standard for reference purposes, in reality none of them stand alone.  So a
subproperty of ubiquity is interdependence, if not smooth integration.   <p>
<p>
	The second major theme is to see classifications and standards as
<b>materially textured.</b>  Under the sway of cognitivism, it is easy to see
classifications as properties of mind and standards as ideal numbers or
settings.  But both have material force in the world, and are built into and
embedded in every feature of the built environment (and many of the
borderlands, such as with engineered genetic organisms).  When we think of
classifications and standards as material, we can afford ourselves of what we
know about material structures, such as structural integrity, enclosures and
confinements, permeability, and durability, among many others.  We see people
doing this all the time in describing organizational settings, and a common way
to hear people's experience of this materiality is through metaphors.  So the
generation of metaphors is closely linked with the shift to texture. <p>
<p>
	The third major theme is to see <b>the past as indeterminate</b><a
href="actnet_fn.html#fn1">[4]</a>. This is not a new idea to historiography,
but is important in understanding the evolution of ubiquitous
classification/standardization and the multiple voices that are represented in
any scheme.  No one classification orders reality for everyone -- e.g. the red
light-green light-yellow light categories don't work for blind people or those
who are red-green color blind. In looking to classification schemes as ways of
ordering the past, it is easy to forget those who are overlooked in this way.
Thus, the indeterminacy of the past implies recovering multi-vocality; it also
means understanding how standard narratives that seem universal have been
constructed (Star, 1991a). <p>
<p>
	The fourth major theme is uncovering <b>the practical politics of classifying
and standardizing</b>.  There are two aspects of these politics:  arriving at
categories and standards, and, in the process, deciding what will be visible
within the system (and of course what will thus then be invisible).  The
negotiated nature of standards and classifications follows from indeterminacy
and multiplicity that whatever appears as universal or, indeed, standard, is
the result of negotiations or conflict.  How do these negotiations take place?
Who determines the final outcome in preparing a formal classification?
Visibility issues arise as one decides where to make the cuts in the system,
for example,  down to what level of detail one specifies a description of work,
of an illness, of a setting.  Because there are always advantages and
disadvantages to being visible, this becomes crucial in the workability of the
schema. <p>
<p>
<b>Ubiquity</b> 	<p>
	In the built world we inhabit, thousands and thousands of standards are used
everywhere, from setting up the plumbing in a house to assembling a car engine
to transferring a file from one computer to another.  Consider the canonically
simple act of writing a letter longhand, putting it in an envelope and mailing
it.  There are standards for (inter alia): paper size, the distance that lines
are apart if it is lined paper, envelope size, the glue on the envelope, the
size of stamps, their glue, the ink in the pen that you wrote with, the
sharpness of its nib, the composition of the paper (which in turn can be broken
down to the nature of the watermark, if any; the degree of recycled material
used in its production, the definition of what counts as recycling).  And so
forth. <p>
<p>
	Similarly, in any bureaucracy, classifications abound -- consider the simple
but increasingly common classifications that are used when you dial an airline
for information now ("if you are traveling domestically, press 1"; "if you want
information about flight arrivals and departures, press 2....").   And once the
airline has hold of you, you are classified by them as a frequent flyer
(normal, gold or platinum); corporate or individual; tourist or business class;
short haul or long haul (different fare rates and scheduling applies); irate or
not (different hand-offs to the supervisor when you complain). <p>
	A systems approach would see the proliferation of both standards and
classifications as a matter of integration -- almost like a gigantic web of
interoperability.  Yet the sheer density of these phenomena go beyond questions
of interoperability. They are layered, tangled, textured; they interact to form
an ecology as well as a flat set of compatibilities. There ARE spaces between
(unclassified, non-standard areas), of course, and these are equally important
to the analysis. A question: it seems that increasingly these spaces are marked
as unclassified and non-standard. How does that change their qualities?  <p>
	It is a struggle to step back from this complexity and think about the issue
of ubiquity broadly, rather than try to trace the myriad connections in any one
case. We need concepts for understanding movements, textures, shifts that will
grasp larger patterns in this. For instance, the distribution of residual
categories ("not elsewhere classified" or "other"), is one such concept.
"Others" are everywhere.  The analysis of any one instance of a residual
category might yield information about biases or what is valued in any given
circumstance; seeing that residual categories are ubiquitous offers a much more
general sweep on the categorizing tendencies of most modern cultures.
Another class of concepts which are found ubiquitously, and which speak to the
general pervasiveness of standards and classification schemes, concern those
which describe tangles or mismatches between subsystems.  For instance, what
Strauss calls a "cumulative mess trajectory" is a useful notion  (Strauss, et
al., 1985).   In medicine, this occurs when one has an illness, is given a
medicine to cure the illness, but incurs a serious side effect, which then
needs to be treated with another medicine, etc. If the trajectory becomes so
tangled that you can't return and the interactions multiply, "cumulative mess"
results. We see this phenomenon in the interaction of categories and standards
all the time -- ecological examples are particularly rich places to look.  <p>
<p>
 <b>Texturing Classification and Standardization </b>	<p>
	How do we "see" this densely saturated classified world? We are commonly used
to casually black-boxing this behind-the-scenes machinery, even to the point,
as we noted above, of ascribing a casual magic to it.  All classification and
standardization schemes are a mixture of physical entities such as paper forms,
plugs, or software instructions encoded in silicon and conventional
arrangements such as speed and rhythm, dimension, and how specifications are
implemented.  Perhaps because of this mixture, the web of intertwined schemes
can be difficult to "see." In general, the trick is to question every
apparently natural easiness in the world around us and look for the work
involved in making it easy.  Within a project or on a desktop, the seeing
consists in seamlessly moving between the physical and the conventional.  So
when a computer programmer writes some lines of C code, she moves within
conventional constraints and makes innovations based on them; at the same time,
she strikes plastic keys, shifts notes around on a desktop, and consults
manuals for various standards and other information. If we were to try to list
out all the classifications and standards involved in writing a program, the
list could run to pages.  Classifications include types of objects, types of
hardware, matches between requirements categories and code categories, and
meta-categories such as the goodness of fit of the piece of code with the
larger system under development. Standards range from the precise integration
of the underlying hardware to the 60Hz power coming out of the wall through a
standard size plug.   <p>
	Merely reducing the description to the physical aspect such as the plugs does
not get us anywhere interesting in terms of the actual mixture of physical and
conventional.  A good operations researcher could describe how and whether
things would work together, often purposefully blurring the
physical/conventional boundaries in making the analysis.  But what is missing
there is a sense of the landscape of work as experienced by those within it.
It gives no sense of something as important as the texture of an organization:
it is smooth or rough?  Bare or knotty?  What is needed is a sense of the
topography of all of the arrangements -- are they colliding?  co-extensive?
gappy?  orthogonal?  	One way to begin to get at these questions is to begin to
take quite literally the kinds of metaphors that people use when describing
their experience of organizations, bureaucracies, and information systems
(Star, in press).    So, for example, when someone says something simple like
"things are running smoothly," the smoothness is descriptive of an array of
articulations of people, things, work and standards.  When someone says, "I
feel as though the whole project is moving through thick molasses," it points
to the opposite experience.  These are not merely poetic expressions, although
at some level they are that, too.  As Schon pointed out in his seminal book,
<i>Displacement of Concepts, </i>a metaphor is an import, meant to illuminate
aspects of a current situation via juxtaposition (1963).  It is also a rich and
often unmined source of knowledge about people's experience of the densely
classified world. <p>
<p>
 <b>The Indeterminacy of the Past </b>	<p>
	There is no way of ever getting access to the past except through
classification systems of one sort or another - formal or informal,
hierarchical or not ... .   Take the unproblematic statement: "In 1640, the
English Revolution occurred; this led to a twenty year period in which the
English had no monarchy".  The classifications involved here include:  	<p>
*	The current segmentation of time into days, months and years.  Accounts of
the English revolution generally use the Gregorian calendar, which was adopted
some hundred years later - so causing translation problems with contemporary
documents; <p>
*	The classification of `peoples' into English, Irish, Scots, French and so on.
These designations were by no means so clear at the time - the whole discourse
of national genius really only arose in the nineteenth century; 	<p>
<b>*	</b>The classification of events into revolutions, reforms, revolts,
rebellions and so forth (cf. Furet, 1978 on thinking the French revolution).
There really was no concept of `revolution' at the time; our current conception
is marked by the historiographical work of Karl Marx. <b>	</b><p>
<b></b>*	And then, what do we classify as being a `monarchy'?  There is a
strong historiographical tradition which says that Oliver Cromwell was a
monarch - he walked, talked and acted like one after all.  Under this view,
there is no hiatus at all in this English institution; rather a usurper took
the throne. <p>
<p>
	There are two major schools of thought with respect to using classification
systems on the past - one saying that we should only use classifications
available to actors at the time (authors in this tradition warn against the
dangers of anachronism - Hacking (1995) on child abuse is a sophisticated
version) and the other that we should use the real classifications that
progress in the arts and sciences has uncovered (typically history informed by
current sociology will take this path - for example Tort's (1989) work on
`genetic' classification systems, which were not so called at the time, but
which are of vital interest to the Foucaldian problematic).  Whichever we
choose, it is clear that we should always understand classification systems
according to the work that they are doing -the network within which they are
embedded. <p>
<b>	</b>When we ask historical questions about the deeply and heterogeneously
structured space of classification systems and standards, we are dealing with a
4-dimensional archaeology - some of the structures it  uncovers are stable,
some in motion; some evolving, some decaying. An institutional memory, about
say, an epidemic, can be held simultaneously and with internal contradictions
(sometimes piecemeal or distributed and sometimes with entirely different
stories at different locations) across [a given institutional] space.  <p>
	In the case of AIDS, for example, there are shifting classifications over the
last 20 years, including the invention of the category in the first place.
There is then a backwards look at cases which might have been AIDS before we
had the category (a problematic gaze to be sure, as Bruno Latour (forthcoming)
has written about tuberculosis; see also Star and Bowker, 1997). There are the
stories about collecting information about a shameful disease, and a wealth of
personal narratives about living with it. There is a public health story and a
virology story, which use different category systems. There are the
standardized forms of insurance companies and the categories and standards of
the census bureau; when an attempt was made to combine them in the 80s to
disenfranchise young men living in San Francisco from getting health insurance,
the resultant political challenge stopped the combination of this data from
being so used. At the same time, the blood banks refused for years to employ
HIV screening, thus refusing the admission of another category to their blood
labeling -- as Shilts (1987) tells us, with many casualties as a result.  <p>
<p>
<b>Practical Politics</b> 	<p>
	Someone, somewhere, often a body of people in the proverbial gray suits and
smoke-filled rooms, must decide and argue over the minutiae of classifying and
standardizing.  The negotiations themselves form the basis for a fascinating
practical ontology -- our favorite example is when is someone really alive?  Is
it breathing, attempts at breathing, movement....?  And how long must each of
those last?  Whose voice will determine the outcome is sometimes an exercise of
pure power:  we, the holders of Western medicine and of colonialism, will
decide what a disease is, and simply obviate systems such as acupuncture or
Ayruvedic medicine.  Sometimes the negotiations are more subtle, involving
questions such as the disparate viewpoints of an immunologist and a surgeon, or
a public health official (interested in even ONE case of the plague) and a
statistician (for whom one case is not relevant) (Neumann and Star, 1996).
<p>
	Once a system is in place, the practical politics of these decisions are often
forgotten, literally buried in archives (when records are kept at all) or built
into software or the sizes and compositions of things.  In addition to our
archaeological expeditions into the records of such negotiations, we provide
here some observations of the negotiations in action. 	Finally, even where
everyone agrees on the way the classifications or standards should be
established, there are often practical difficulties about how to craft their
architecture.  For example, a classification system with 20,000 "bins" on every
form is practically unusable.  (The original International Classification of
Diseases had some 200 diseases not because of the nature of the human body and
its problems but because this was the maximum number that would fit the large
census sheets then in use).  Sometimes the decision about how fine-grained to
make the system has political consequences as well.  For instance, in
describing and recording the tasks someone does, as in the case of nursing
work, may mean controlling or surveilling their work as well, and may imply an
attempt to take away discretion.  After all, the loosest classification of work
is accorded to those with the most power and discretion, who are able to set
their own terms.  <p>
<b>	</b>These ubiquitous, textured classifications and standards help frame our
representation of the past and the sequencing of events in the present.  They
can best be understood as doing the ever-local, ever-partial work of making it
appear that science describes nature (and nature alone) and that politics is
about social power (and social power alone). Consider the case discussed at
length by Young (1995) and Kirk and Kutchins (1992) of psychoanalysts who in
order to receive reimbursement for this procedures need to couch them in a
biomedical language (the DSM) that is anathema to them, but is the lingua
franca of the medical insurance companies.  There are local translation
mechanisms that allow the DSM to continue to operate and to provide the sole
legal, recognized representation of mental disorder.  A `reverse engineering'
of the DSM or the ICD reveals the multitude of local political and social
struggles and compromises which go into the constitution of a `universal'
classification. <p>
<p>
<i>INFRASTRUCTURE AND ACTOR NETWORK THEORY </i>	<p>
<p>
	We have, then, looked briefly at the space and time of the infrastructures
that subtend actor-networks.  Our position is that through due attention to
these infrastructures, we can achieve an understanding of how it is that actor
network theory comes to be a useful way of describing the nature scientific
knowledge on the one hand and the (increasing) convergence of human and
non-human on the other. <p>
	The converging sameness of humans and non-humans, and in general the
construction of a world in which actor-network theory is true, is a political
and ethical question.  Work by  scholars such as Joan Fujimura (1991), Valerie
Singleton and Mike Michael (1993)  and Leigh Star  (1991b; 1995) has pointed to
the fact that actor-network theory can be read as an uncritical
<i>celebration</i> of the power of modern science  and technology.  There are
certainly readings of Latour's <u>Science in Action</u> or <u>The
Pasteurization of France</u> which could support such an assertion.  Through
our concentration on the work of standardization and classification - a
concentration fully consonant with the analysis of Latour and Callon - we are
pointing to a place where actor-network theory can be further developed; and to
a place where its political side meets its philosophical underpinnings. <p>
	In order to clarify our position here, let us take an analogy.  In the early
nineteenth century in England there were a huge number of capital crimes -
starting from stealing a loaf of bread and going up... .   However, precisely
because the penalties were so draconian, few juries would ever impose the
maximum sentence; and indeed there was actually a drastic reduction in the
number of executions even as the penal code was progressively strengthened.
There are two ways of writing this history - one can either concentrate on the
creation of the law; or one can concentrate on the way things worked out in
practice.  This is very similar to the position taken in Latour's<i> We have
never been modern</i>: where he says we can either look at what scientists say
that they are doing (working within a purified realm of knowledge) or at what
they actually are doing (manufacturing hybrids).  Actor network theory has
looked in detail at the role of relatively black-boxed hybrids in creating the
discourse of pure science as endpoint; we are advocating a development of the
theory that pays more attention to the classification and standardization work
that allows for hybrids to be manufactured and so explores the terrain of the
politics of science in action. <p>
	The point for us is that both of these are valid kinds of account.  Early
actor-network theory concentrated on the ways in which it comes to seem that
science gives an objective account of natural order: trials of strength,
enrolling of allies, cascades of inscriptions and the operation of immutable
mobiles.  It drew attention to the importance of the development of standards
(though not to the linked development of classification systems); but did not
look at these in detail.  We were invited to look at the process of producing
something which looked like what the positivists alleged science to be.  We got
to see the `Janus face' of science.  In so doing we `followed the actors'.  We
shared their insights (allies must be enrolled, translation mechanisms must be
set in train so that, in the canonical case, Pasteur's laboratory work can be
seen as a direct translation of the quest for French honor after defeat in the
battlefield).   <p>
	However, by the very nature of the method, we also shared their blindness.
The actors being followed did not <i>see</i> what was excluded: they
constructed a world in which that exclusion could occur.  Thus if we just
follow the doctors who create the International Classification of Diseases at
the World Health Organization in Geneva, we will not see the variety of
representation systems that other cultures have for classifying diseases of the
body and spirit; and we will not see the fragile networks these classification
systems subtend.  Rather, we will see only those actants who are strong enough,
and shaped in the right way, to impact the fragile actor-networks of allopathic
medicine.  We will see the blind leading the blind.    <p>
	We ascribe to Latour's (1987) definition of reality as `that which resists'
(again, a concept with strong American pragmatist resonances, se e.g. Dewey,
1916). The actor-network will be changed by the resistances that it encounters.
We have suggested that the work of dealing with resistance is twofold: 	<p>
*	Changing the world such that the actor-network's description of reality
becomes true.  Thus if all diseases (of the mind and body) are classified
purely physiologically and systems of medical observation and treatment are set
up such the physical manifestations are the only manifestations recorded and
physical treatments are the only treatments available then it is of course
possible that the world will be such that schizophrenia, say, results purely
and simply from a chemical imbalance in the brain.  It will be impossible to
think or act otherwise.  We have called this the principle of <i>convergence
</i>(Star and Bowker, 1994; Neumann, Bowker and Star, in press). 	<p>
*	Distributing the resistance in such a way that it becomes marginalized and
can be overlooked.  <p>
<p>
	A good example of responses to resistances comes from the nursing
administrators we are studying at present.  We will see how they are producing
a classification of nursing work whose political edge is in the technical work
of meshing this classification system with those already operating within the
sociotechnical framework of the hospital.  There is a play of resistances
around this political of representation.<p>
	The Iowa Intervention Team are producing a classification of all nursing work
- a nursing interventions classification (NIC) (McCloskey and Bulechek, 1996).
NIC itself is a fascinating system. Those of us studying it see it as an
ethnomethodological nirvana. Some categories, like <i>bleeding reduction -
nasal</i>, are on the surface relatively obvious and codable into discrete
units of work practice to be carried out on specific occasions. But what about
the equally important categories of hope installation and humor?   Hope
installation includes the subcategory of `Avoid masking the truth'. This is not
so much something that nurses do on a regular basis, as something that they
should not do constantly. It also includes: `Help the patient expand spiritual
self'. Here the contribution that the nurse is making is to an implicit
lifelong program of spiritual development. With respect to humor, the very
definition of the category suggests the operation of a paradigm shift:
"Facilitating the patient to perceive, appreciate, and express what is funny,
amusing, or ludicrous in order to establish relationships"; and it is unclear
how this could ever be attached to a time line: it is something the nurse
should always do while doing other things. Further, contained within the
nursing classification is an anatomy of what it is to be humorous, and a theory
of what humor does. The recommended procedures break humor down into
subelements. One should determine the types of humor appreciated by the
patient; determine the patient's typical response to humor (e.g. laughter or
smiles); select humorous materials that create moderate arousal for the
individual (for example `picture a forbidding authority figure dressed only in
underwear'); encourage silliness and playfulness and so on to make a total of
fifteen sub-activities: any one of which might be scientifically relevant. A
feature traditionally attached to the personality of the nurse (being a
cheerful and supportive person) is now attached through the classification to
the job description as an intervention which can be accounted for. <p>
	Within the context of the hospital's sociotechnical system, nursing work has
been deemed irrelevant to any possible future reconstruction; it has been
canonically invisible, in Star's (1991a) term. The logic of NIC's advocators is
that what has been excluded from the representational space of medical practice
should be included.    The Iowa group, the kernel of whom were teachers of
nursing administration, made essentially three arguments for the creation of a
nursing classification. First, it was argued that without a standard language
to describe nursing interventions, there would be no way of producing a
scientific body of knowledge about nursing. NIC in theory would be articulated
with two other classification systems: NOC (the nursing sensitive patient
outcomes classification scheme) and NANDA (the nursing diagnosis scheme). The
three could work together thusly. One could perform studies over a set of
hospitals employing the three schemes in order to check if a given category of
patient responded well to a given category of nursing intervention. Rather than
this comparative work being done anecdotally as in the past through the
accumulation of experience, it could be done scientifically through the conduct
of experiments. The Iowa Intervention project made up a jingle: NANDA, NIC and
NOC to the tune of Hickory, Dickory, Dock to stress this interrelationship of
the three schemes. The second argument for classifying nursing interventions
was that it was a key strategy for defending the professional autonomy of
nursing. The Iowa nurses are very aware of the literature on
professionalization - notably Schon (1983) - and are aware of the force of
having an accepted body of scientific knowledge as their domain. (Indeed Andrew
Abbott, taking as his central case the professionalization of medicine, makes
this one of his key attributes of a profession [1988].) The third argument was
that nursing, alongside other medical professions, was moving into the new
world of computers. As the representational medium changed, it was important to
be able to talk about nursing in a language that computers could understand  -
else nursing work would not be represented at all in the future, and would risk
being even further marginalized than it was at present.<p>
	However, there is also a danger in representing.  It is more difficult to hive
off aspects of nursing duties and give them to lower paid adjuncts, if nursing
work is relatively opaque. The test sites that are implementing NIC have
provided some degree of resistance here, arguing that activities should be
specified - so that, within a soft decision support model a given diagnosis can
trigger a nursing intervention constituted of a single, well-defined set of
activities. As Marc Berg (in press) has noted in his study of medical expert
systems, such decision support can only work universally if local practices are
rendered fully standard. A key professional strategy for nursing - particularly
in the face of the ubiquitous process re-engineer - is realized by deliberate
non-representation in the information infrastructure. What is remembered in the
formal information systems resulting is attuned to professional strategy and to
the information requisites of the nurses' take on what nursing science is. <p>
	Further, there is a brick wall that they come up against when dealing with
nurses on the spot: if they overspecify an intervention (that is break it down
into too many constituent parts), then it gets called, in the field, an NSS
classification - where NSS stands for `No shit, Sherlock' and is not used
(Bowker, Star and Timmermans, 1996). It is assumed that any reasonable
education in nursing or medicine should lead to a common language wherein
things do not need spelling out to the ultimate degree. The information space
will be sufficiently well pre-structured that some details can be assumed.
Attention to the finer-grained details is delegated to the educational system,
where it is overdetermined. <p>
	These NIC-related strategies of dealing with overspecification and the
political drive to relative autonomy by dropping things out of the
representational space - are essential for the development of a successful
actor-network system that includes nursing. These two forms of erasure of local
context are needed in order to create the very infrastructure in which nursing
can both appear as a science like any other and yet nursing as a profession can
continue to develop as a rich, local practice. The ongoing erasure is
guaranteed by the classification system: only information about nursing
practice recognized by NIC can be coded on the forms fed into a hospital's
computers or stored in a file cabinet. <p>
	Nursing informaticians agree as a body that in order for proper health care to
be given and for nurses to be recognized as a profession, hospitals as
organizations should code for nursing within the framework of their memory
systems: nursing work should be classified and forms should be generated which
utilize these classifications. However, there has been disagreement with
respect to strategy.  To understand the difference that has emerged, recall one
of those forms you have filled in (we have all experienced one) which do not
allow you to say what you think. You may, in a standard case, have been offered
a choice of several racial origins; but may not believe in any such
categorization. There is no room on the form to write an essay on race identity
politics. So you either you make an uncomfortable choice in order to get
counted, and hope that enough of your complexity will be preserved by your set
of answers to the form; or you don't answer the question and perhaps decide to
devote some time to lobbying the producers of the offending form to reconsider
their categorization of people. The NIC group has wrestled with the same
strategic choice: fitting their classification system into the Procrustean bed
of all the other classification systems that they have to articulate with in
any given medical setting in order to form part a given organization's
potential memory; or rejecting the ways in which memory is structured in the
organizations that they are dealing with. We will now look in turn at each of
these strategies. <p>
	Let us look first at the argument for including NIC within the information
infrastructural framework of the hospital's sociotechnical system. They argue
that NIC has to respond to multiple important agendas simultaneously. Consider
the following description of needs for a standard vocabulary of nursing
practice: <p>
It is essential to develop a standardized nomenclature of nursing diagnoses in
order to name without ambiguity those conditions in clients that nurses
identify and treat without prescription from other disciplines; such
identification is not possible without agreement as to the meaning of terms.
Professional standards review boards require discipline-specific
accountability; some urgency in developing a discipline-specific nomenclature
is provided by the impending National Health Insurance legislation, since
demands for accountability are likely both to increase and become more
stringent following passage of the legislation. Adoption of a standardized
nomenclature of nursing diagnoses may also alleviate problems in communication
between nurses and members of other disciplines, and improvement in
interdisciplinary communication can only lead to improvement in patient care.
Standardization of the nomenclature of nursing diagnoses will promote health
care delivery by identifying, for legal and reimbursement purposes, the
evaluation of the quality of care provided by nurses; facilitate the
development of a taxonomy of nursing diagnoses; provide the element for storage
and retrieval of nursing data; and facilitate the teaching of nursing by
providing content areas that are discrete, inclusive, logical, and consistent .
(Castles, 1981, 38) <p>
We have cited this passage at length since it unites most of the motivations
for the development of NIC. The development of a new information infrastructure
for nursing, heralded in this passage, will make nursing more `memorable'. It
will also lead to a clearance of past nursing knowledge - henceforth
prescientific - from the textbooks; it will lead to changes in the practice of
nursing (a redefinition of disciplinary boundaries) - a shaping of nursing so
that future practice converges on its representation. <p>
	Many nurses and nursing informaticians are concerned that the profession
itself may have to change too much in order to meet the requirements of the
information infrastructure. We murder, they note, to dissect. In her study of
nursing information systems in France, Ina Wagner (1993) speaks as follows of
the gamble of computerizing nursing records: <p>
Nurses might gain greater recognition for their work and more control over the
definition of patients' problems while finding out that their practice is
increasingly shaped by the necessity to comply with regulators' and employers'
definitions of 'billable categories.'<p>
Indeed, a specific feature of this 'thought world' into which nurses are
gradually socialized through the use of computer systems is the integration of
management criteria into the practice of nursing.  She continues:  "Working
with a patient classification system with time units associated with each care
activity enforces a specific time discipline on nurses. They learn to assess
patients' needs in terms of working time."  This analytic perspective is shared
by the Iowa nurses. They argue that documentation is centrally important; it
not only provides a record of nursing activity but structures same:  <p>
	While nurses do complain about paperwork, they structure their care so that
the required forms get filled out. If the forms reflect a philosophy of the
nurse as a dependent assistant to the doctor who delivers technical care in a
functional manner, this is to some extent the way the nurse will act. If the
forms reflect a philosophy of the nurse as a professional member of the health
team with a unique independent function, the nurse will act accordingly. In the
future, with the implementation of price-per-case reimbursement
vis-&agrave;-vis diagnosis related groups, documentation will become more
important than ever. (Bulechek and McCloskey, 1985, 406). <p>
	As the NIC classification has developed, observes Joanne McCloskey, the
traditional category of `nursing process' has been replaced by `clinical
decision making plus knowledge classification'. And in a representation of NIC
that she produced both the patient and the nurse had dropped entirely out of
the picture (both were, she said, located within the `clinical decision making
box' on her diagram) (Iowa Intervention Project meeting, 6/8/95). A recent book
about the next generation nursing information system argued that the new
system: <p>
Cannot be assembled like a patchwork quilt, by piecing together components of
existing technologies and software programs. Instead, the system must be
rebuilt on a design different from that of most approaches used today: it must
be a data-driven rather than a process-driven system. A dominant feature of the
new system is its focus on the acquisition, management, processing, and
presentation of 'atomic-level' data that can be used across multiple settings
for multiple purposes. The paradigm shift to a data-driven system represents a
new generation of information technology; it provides strategic resources for
clinical nursing practice, rather than just support for various nursing tasks.
(Zielstorff et al., 1993, 1). <p>
This speaks to the progressive denial of process and continuity through the
segmentation of nursing practice into activity units. Many argue that in order
to `speak with' databases at a national and international level just such
segmentation is needed. The fear is that unless nurses can describe their
process this way (at the risk of losing the essence of that process in the
description), then it will not be described at all. They can only have there
own actions remembered at the price of having others forget, and possibly
forgetting themselves, precisely what it is that they do. <p>
	Some nursing informaticians have chosen instead to challenge the informational
framework existing in the medical organizations they deal with. They have
adopted a Batesonian strategy of responding to the threat of the new
information infrastructure by moving the whole argument up one level of
generality and trying to supplant `data-driven' categories with categories that
recognize process on their own terms. Thus the Iowa team pointed to the fact
that women physicians often spend longer with patients than male doctors, but
they need to see patients less often as a result: they argue that just such a
process-sensitive definition of productivity needs to argued for and
implemented in medical information systems in order that nursing work gets
fairly represented (Iowa Intervention Project meeting, 6/8/95). They draw from
their secret (because unrepresented) reservoir of knowledge about process in
order to challenge the data-driven models from within.  <p>
	Within this strategy, the choice of allies is by no means obvious. Since with
the development of NIC we are dealing with the creation of an information
infrastructure, the whole question of how and what to challenge becomes very
difficult. Scientists can only, willy nilly, deal with data as presented to
them by their information base, just as historians of previous centuries must,
alas, rely on written traces. When creating a new information infrastructure
for an old activity, questions have a habit of running away from one: a
technical issue about how to code process can become a challenge to
organizational theory (and its database). A defense of process can become an
attack on the scientific world view. One of the chief attacks on the NIC scheme
has been made by a nursing informatician, Susan Grobe, who believes that rather
than standardize nursing language computer scientists should develop natural
language processing tools so that nurse narratives can be interpreted. Grobe
argues for the abandonment of any goal of producing: "A single coherent account
of the pattern of action and beliefs in science" (1992, 92); she goes on to say
that: "philosophers of science have long acknowledged the value of a
multiplicity of scientific views" (92). She excoriates Bulechek and McCloskey,
architects of NIC, for having produced work: "derived from the natural science
view with its hierarchical structures and mutually exclusive and distinct
categories." (93). She on the other hand is drawing from cognitive science,
library science and social science (94). Or again, a recent paper on conceptual
considerations, decision criteria and guidelines for the Nursing Minimum Data
Set cited Fritjof Capra against reductionism, Steven Jay Gould on the social
embeddedness of scientific truth and praised Foucault for having developed a
philosophical system to "grapple with this reality" (Kritek, 1988, 24). Nurse
scientists, it is argued, "have become quite reductionistic and mechanistic in
their approach to knowledge generation, at a time when numerous others,
particularly physicists, are reversing that pattern" (p. 27). And nursing has
to find allies amongst these physicists: <p>
Nurses who deliver care engage in a process. It is actually the cyclic,
continuous repetition of a complex process. It is difficult, therefore, to
sketch the boundaries of a discrete nursing event, a unit of service, and,
therefore, a unit of analysis. Time is clearly a central force in nursing care
and nursing outcomes. Nurses have only begun to struggle with this factor. It
has a centrality that eludes explication when placed in the context of quantum
physics. (Kritek, 1988: 28) <p>
The point here is not whether this argument is right or wrong. It is an
interesting position. It can only be maintained, as can many of the other
possible links that bristle through the NIC literature, because the information
infrastructure itself is in flux. When the infrastructure is not in place to
provide a `natural' hierarchy of levels, then discourses can and do make
strange connections between themselves.  <p>
	If they want to prove a case within a given hospital for the opening-up of a
new nursing position, they need to demonstrate  that nursing is cost-effective
according to the dominant accountancy paradigm.  Now they in fact disagree with
this paradigm (arguing, for example, that `quality of care' is not quantifiable
but is still significant); and yet they feel that they must act <i>as if</i>
they accept it - or else their voice will not be heard at all.  There are a
group of radical accountants who argue for the kinds of position that the NIC
nurses are taking; however, these accountants are tied in to a different series
of local battles about classification and standardization.  The resistance to
such cost accounting might be large in the aggregate while its impact, because
of effective distribution, is minimal.<p>
	In order to not be continually erased from the record, nursing informaticians
are risking either modifying their own practice (making it more data driven) or
waging a Quixotic war on database designers. The corresponding gain is great,
however. If the infrastructure itself is designed in such a way that nursing
information has to be present as an independent, well defined category, then
nursing itself as a profession will have a much better chance of surviving
through rounds of process re-engineering and nursing science as a discipline
will have a firm foundation. The infrastructure assumes the position of Bishop
Berkeley's God: as long as it pays attention to nurses, they will continue to
exist. Having ensured that all nursing acts are potentially remembered by any
medical organization, the NIC team will have gone a long way to ensuring the
future of nursing. <p>
 	What actor-network theory has to offer in its approach to resistance is a
reading of where and how political work is done in the world of technoscience;
and how such work can be problematized and challenged.    Donald MacKenzie's
wonderful study of `missile accuracy' furnishes the best example of this
approach.  In a concluding chapter to his book, he discusses the possibility of
`uninventing the bomb', by which he means changing society and technology in
such a way that the atomic bomb becomes an impossibility.  Such change, he
suggests, can be carried out in part at the overt level of political
organizations.  However, and crucially for our purposes, he also sensitizes the
reader to the site of the development and maintenance of technical standards as
a site of political decisions and struggle.  Standards and classifications,
however dry and formal on the surface are suffused with traces of political and
social work. <p>
<p>
<i>CONCLUSION</i><p>
<i> </i>	It is difficult when discussing any theory to adopt the appropriate
degree of reflexivity.  Actor-network theory tells us quite clearly that a
theory should not be judged according to an absolute set of indicators, but
according to the work that it does in the world.  How does the theory itself
stand up against this criterion?  <p>
	We have argued that it can do a good job in drawing our attention to the real
political work that is being done in the development of technoscience; and can
provide us with some useful concepts for analyzing that work.  We have not in
this paper argued, but would maintain (in accordance especially with Michel
Serres' corpus; and to an extent Latour's  <i>We have never been modern</i> and
<i>Dieux Faitiches</i>) the symmetrical position that there is real
philosophical and scientific work being done in the realm traditionally seen as
the purely political.  The central point is that technoscientific societies are
powerful precisely because they are so good at delegating and distributing; and
that actor-network theory is well position to track and describe the work of
delegation and distribution. <p>
	Does this mean that actor-network theory is <i>the </i>theory for our times?
Indeed not.  However, it is <i>a </i>theory which takes the work of
classification and standardization seriously; and so provides one way of
understanding the development of a master narrative (Western science) which is
not a master narrative (because it frequently breaks down locally as
postmodernists would remind us) and yet which act likes one (in that it enacts
the very exclusions and silencing that allow it to appear to be true).   The
magic of modern technoscience is a lot of hard work. <p>
<b>References:</b><p>
<b></b><p>
Abbate, J. and Kahin, B.  (eds) (1995). <i>Standards policy for information
infrastructure</i>.  Cambridge, Ma : MIT Press.<p>
<p>
Abbott, A. (1988).<i>The system of professions : an essay on the division of
expert labor</i>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.<p>
<p>
Baudrillard, Jean. (1990).  <i>Cool memories</i> .  New York: Verso.<p>
<p>
Becker, H.S. (1996).  `The epistemology of qualitative research' in R. Jessor,
A. Colby and R. A. Shweder, eds<i>., Ethnography and human development; Context
and meaning in social inquiry</i>, Chicago: University of Chicago.  pp.
53-71.<p>
<p>
Berg, M. (forthcoming 1996).  <i>Rationalizing medical work - decision support
techniques and medical problems</i>.  Cambridge, MA: MIT Press.<p>
<p>
Bowker, G. (1994).<i>  Science on the run: Information management and
industrial geophysics at Schlumberger, 1920-1940</i>.  Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.<p>
<p>
Bowker, G. and Star, S.L. (1994).  Knowledge and Infrastructure in
international information management: Problems of classification and coding.
In L.  Bud-Frierman (ed), <i>Information acumen: The understanding and use of
knowledge in modern business</i> (Pp.187-216).  London: Routledge.<p>
<p>
Bowker, G., Star, S.L. and Timmermans, S. (1996). "Infrastructure and
organizational transformation:  Classifying nurses' work" in W. Orlikowski, G.
Walsham, M. Jones and J. DeGross, eds. <i> Information technology and changes
in organizational work</i>. (<i>Proceedings </i> IFIP WG8.2 Conference,
Cambridge, England.) (Pp.. 344-370)  London:  Chapman and Hall.<p>
<p>
Bulechek, G. and McCloskey, J. (1985).  Future directions.  In Gloria M.
Bulechek, Joanne C. McCloskey, <i>Nursing Interventions: treatments for nursing
diagnoses</i> (Pp.401-408).  Philadelphia, PA: Saunders.     <p>
<p>
Callon, M. (1986).  Some elements of a sociology of translation.  In J. Law
(Ed.), <i>Power, action, and belief: A new sociology of knowledge?</i> (Pp.
196-233).  London: Routledge and Kegan Paul.<p>
<p>
Castles, M.R. (1981). Nursing Diagnosis: standardization of nomenclature. In H.
H. Werley and M. R. Grier (eds), <i>Nursing information systems </i>(Pp.
36-44), New York: Springer.<p>
<p>
David, P. and Rothwell, G. S.  (1994).  <i>Standardization, diversity and
learning : strategies for the coevolution of technology and industrial
capacity.  </i>Stanford, CA : Center for Economic Policy Research, Stanford
University.<p>
<p>
Desrosi&egrave;res, A. and Th&eacute;venot, L. (1988). <i>Les cat&eacute;gories
socio-professionnelles</i>.  	Paris:  D&eacute;couverte.<p>
<p>
Dewey, J. (1916).  <i>Logic: The theory of inquiry</i>.  New York: Holt,
Rinehart and Winston.<p>
<p>
Dewey, J. (1929).  <i>The quest for certainty</i>.  NY:  Open Court.<p>
<p>
Dewey, John.  (1989). [Originally published in 1925).  <i>Experience and
nature</i>. La Salle, IL: Open Court Press.<p>
<p>
Cody, W. (1995).  Letter from William K. Cody, <i>Nursing outlook</i>
(Pp.93-94), 43 (2).<p>
<p>
Fujimura, J. (1991). On methods, ontologies, and representation in the
sociology of science:  Where do we stand?," In David Maines, ed. <i>Social
organization and social process:  Essays in honor of Anselm L. Strauss. </i>
Hawthorne, NY:  Aldine de Gruyter.<p>
<p>
Furet, F.  (1978).  <i>Penser la Revolution francaise</i>. Paris: Gallimard.<p>
<p>
Grobe, S. (1992). Response to J.C. McCloskey's and G.M. Bulechek's Paper on
Nursing Intervention Scheme.  In The Canadian Nurses Association,<i> Papers
from the Nursing Minimum Data Set Conference, October 27-29, 1992</i>,
Edmonton, Alberta: The Canadian Nurses Association.<p>
<p>
Hacking, I. (1995).  <i>Rewriting the soul: multiple personality and the
sciences of memory</i>. Princeton, N.J.: Princeton University Press.<p>
<p>
Huffman, E. (1990).   <i>Medical record management</i>. Berwyn, IL: Physicians'
Record Company.<p>
<p>
Hutchins, E. (1995).  <i>Cognition in the wild</i>.  Cambridge, MA: MIT
Press.<p>
<p>
ICD-10.  (1992).  <i>ICD-10.  International Statistical Classification of
Diseases and Related Health Problems, tenth revision</i>, Volume 1<i>.</i>
Geneva: World Health Organization.<p>
<p>
Jenkins, T. (1988).  New roles for nursing professionals.  In M.J.Ball, K.J.
Hannah, U. Gerdin Jelger, H. Peterson (eds),<i> Nursing Informatics: Here
caring and technology meet </i>(Pp.88-95).  NY: Springer.<p>
<p>
Kirk, S. A. and Kutchins, H.  (1992<i>).  The selling of DSM : the rhetoric of
science in psychiatry</i> .  New York: A. de Gruyter.<p>
<p>
Kritek, P.B, (1988).  Conceptual considerations, decision criteria and
guidelines for the nursing minimum data set from a practice perspective.  In H.
H. Werley and N. M. Lang (eds),<i> Identification of the nursing minimum data
set </i>(Pp.22-33).  New York: Springer.<p>
<p>
Latour, B. (1987).  <i>Science in action: How to follow scientists and
engineers through society</i>.  Milton Keynes: Open University Press.<p>
<p>
Latour, B. (1993).  <i>We have never been modern</i> .  Cambridge, Mass. :
Harvard University Press.<p>
<p>
Latour, B. (1996a).  <i>Aramis or the love of technology</i>.  Cambridge, MA:
Harvard University Press.<p>
<p>
Latour, B. (1996b).  <i>Petite r&eacute;flexion sur le culte moderne des dieux
faitiches</i>.  Paris: Les Empecheurs de penser en rond.<p>
<p>
Latour, B. (forthcoming).  `Did Ramses II die of tuberculosis?  On the partial
existence of existing <i>and </i>non-existing objects'.  Typescript from
author.<p>
<p>
McCloskey, J. and Bulechek, G. (1996). <i>Iowa Intervention Project - Nursing
Interventions Classification.</i> (NIC) Second Edition. St Louis, MO: Mosby.<p>
<p>
MacKenzie, Donald A. (1990<i>).   Inventing accuracy : an historical sociology
of nuclear missile guidance</i> .  Cambridge, MA : MIT Press.<p>
<p>
Neumann, L. J. and Star, S. L.  (1996).  Making infrastructure:  The dream of a
common language,  <i>Proceedings of PDC `96 (Participatory Design
Conference</i>), Eds. J. Blomberg, F. Kensing and E. Dykstra-Erickson.  Palo
Alto, CA:  Computer Professionals for Social Responsibility, pp. pp. 231-240.
<p>
<p>
Neumann, L., Star, S.L. and Bowker, Geoffrey C. (in press).  `Information
convergence'.  Submitted to <i>Journal of the American Society for Information
Science (JASIS)</i>.<p>
<p>
Proust, Marcel.  (1989)<i> A la recherche du temps perdu, tome iv</i>, Paris:
Pleiade.<p>
<p>
Schon, D. (1983). <i>The reflective practitioner : how professionals think in
action</i>.  New York: Basic Books.<p>
<p>
Schon, D.  (1963).  Displacement of concepts.  London:  Tavistock
Publications.<p>
<p>
Serres, M. (1993).  <i>Les origines de la g&eacute;om&eacute;trie</i>.  Paris:
Flammarion.<p>
<p>
Singleton, V. and M. Michael. (1993). Actor-networks and ambivalence:  General
practitioners in the UK Cervical Screening Programme. <i>Social studies of
science</i> 23: 227-64. <p>
<p>
Star, S.L. (1989).<i> Regions of the mind: brain research and the quest for
scientific certainty. </i>Stanford, CA: Stanford University Press.<p>
<p>
Star, S.L. (1991a).  The Sociology of the invisible: The primacy of work in the
writings of Anselm Strauss.  In David Maines (Ed.), <i>Social organization and
social process: Essays in honor of Anselm Strauss </i>(Pp.265-283).  Hawthorne,
NY: Aldine de Gruyter.<p>
<p>
Star, S.L. (1991b).  "Power, technologies and the phenomenology of standards:
On being allergic to onions," in <i>A sociology of monsters?  Power, technology
and the modern world,  </i>John Law, ed.<i> </i> Sociological Review Monograph.
(Pp. 27-57 ).  No. 38, 1991. Oxford:  Basil Blackwell.<p>
<p>
Star, S.L. (1995a) Introduction.  In S.L.Star, ed. <i>Ecologies of knowledge:
Work and politics in science and technology.  </i>  Albany, NY:  SUNY Press.<p>
<p>
Star, S.L. (1995b). The politics of formal representations:  Wizards, gurus and
organizational complexity,"  Pp. 88-118 in S. L. Star, Ed.  <i>Ecologies of
knowledge:  Work and politics in science and technology.</i>  Albany, NY:  SUNY
Press.<p>
<p>
Star, S.L. (In press). Leaks of experience: The link between science and
knowledge. To appear in <i>Thinking Practices</i>, eds. Shelley Goldman and
James Greeno.  Hillsdale, NJ:  Lawrence Erlbaum Associates.<p>
<p>
Star, S. L. and G. C. Bowker.  (1997).  Of lungs and lungers:  The classified
story of tuberculosis. <i>Mind, Culture and Activity.  </i><p>
<p>
Star, S.L. and A. L. Strauss. (In press.) Layers of silence, arenas of voice:
The dialogues between visible and invisible work.  In B. Nardi and Y.
Engestr&ouml;m, eds. <i>A Web on the Wind: The Structure of Invisible Work.
</i><p>
<i></i><p>
<i></i>Strauss, A., S. Fagerhaugh, B. Suczek and C. Wiener. (1985)<i>. Social
organization of medical work</i>. Chicago: University of Chicago Press.<p>
<p>
Tort, P.  (1989). <i> La raison classificatoire : les complexes discursifs :
quinze etudes</i> Paris: Aubier.<p>
<p>
Turnbull, D.  (1993).  `The ad hoc collective work of building gothic
cathedrals with templates, string, and geometry' in <i>Science, technology,
&amp; uman values</i>. (Pp. 315-343). Vol.  18(3).<p>
<p>
Wagner, I., 1993.Women's voice: The case of nursing information systems.  In<i>
AI and society</i>. Vol.  7(4).     <p>
<p>
Weick, K.E. and Roberts, K.H., 1993.  Collective mind in organizations: Heedful
interrelating on flight decks.  In <i>Administrative science quarterly</i>
(Pp.357-381).  Vol. 38.<p>
<p>
Young, A.  <i>The harmony of illusions : inventing post-traumatic stress
disorder</i> .  Princeton, N.J. : Princeton University Press.<p>
<p>
Zielstorff, R.D., Hudgings, C.I., Grobe, S. J.and The National Commission on
Nursing Implementation Project (NCNIP) Task Force on Nursing Information
Systems (1993).  <i>Next-Generation nursing information systems: Essential
characteristics for professional practice</i>, Washington, DC: American Nurses
Publishing.<p>
<p>
</body></html>
