<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML 2.0//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>Theory Seminar, 6 Dec 1996</title>
</head>
<body>
<a href="/~theory/"><img src="/~theory/logo/shortTheory.gif" width= 
"521" height="82" border="0" alt="ICS Theory Group"></a> 

<h1>ICS 269, Fall 1996: Theory Seminar</h1>

<hr>
<h2>6 Dec 1996:<br>
Reconstructing a Three-Dimensional Model with Arbitrary Errors<br>
<a href="http://www.ics.uci.edu/~tdo/">Thuan Do</a>, ICS, UC
Irvine</h2>

A number of current technologies allow for the determination of
inter-atomic distance information in structures such as proteins
and RNA. Thus, the reconstruction of a three-dimensional set of
points using information about its inter-point distances has become
a task of basic importance in determining molecular structure. But
the measurements are error-prone and some of the entries of the
mesured distance matrix are arbitrarity "corrupted." 

<p>In this paper, the authors present an algorithm which runs in
O(<i>n</i>&nbsp;log&nbsp;<i>n</i>) time, where <i>n</i> is the
number of points, and that algorithm can reconstruct the model of
points <i>P</i> from its distance matrix, which has many errors and
which is also not complete. The algorithm will produce a constant
number of point sets consistent to a given distance matrix <i>
M</i>, and one of them will be the correct point set <i>P</i>.</p>

<p>(Based on a STOC '96 paper by <a href= 
"http://theory.lcs.mit.edu/~bab/">Bonnie Berger</a>, <a href= 
"http://www.cs.cornell.edu/home/kleinber/kleinber.html">Jon
Kleinberg</a>, and <a href="http://theory.lcs.mit.edu/~ftl/">Tom
Leighton</a>.)</p>
</body>
</html>

