<!DOCTYPE HTML PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML//EN">
<html>
  <head>
    <title>Washington, DC WEBDAV Meeting Summary</title>
  </head>

  <body>
<h2>WEBDAV Working Group Summary</h2>

<P>The WEBDAV working group met two times at the Washington IETF meeting,
on Monday and Tuesday, December 8-9, 1997, and 78 people attended one
or both of the sessions.  The first session began with a mini-BOF on
the topic of WEBDAV searching and locating (DASL), which was led by
Saveen Reddy.  During this mini-BOF, the goals of the working group
were presented, and some discussion on the group took place.
Attendees notes that there was overlap between the issues being
considered by LESSOR and DASL, however there was some agreement that
DASL would be able to build upon the work of the LESSOR group.  At the
end of the mini-BOF, a poll of the attendees found substantial, but
not unanimous, support for having a DASL working group in the IETF.

<p>After the DASl mini-BOF, the WEBDAV session begain with a status
report on the current documents being developed by the working group,
including the creation of a new versioning protocol specification, now
that the main protocol document is focused on distributed authoring
capability. During this status report, the chair announced that there
will be a working group last call on the distributed authoring
protocol document in January.

<p>A discussion of open issues in the distributed authoring protocol
specification took place during the remainder of the session.
Functionality for ordered collections was discussed, with debate
centering on what kind of ordered collection support should be
provided, and whether the support should be mandatory given the
processing burden on servers.  No resolution was reached, discussion
will continue on the list.  Security considerations were discussed
next, and the group reached agreement that a) the security
considerations from HTTP/1.1 need to be reviewed to ensure they are
unchanged for the domain of distributed authoring, b) WEBDAV will
mandate use of digest authentication, c) for cases where greater
security that an unencoded session is needed, use TLS will be
recommended.  Finally, the working group agreed with the decisions of
the Design Team that the INDEX method be removed in conjunction with
adding recursive capability to PROPFIND, and the PATCH method be moved
to the versioning specification.

<p>Access Control was the topic of the second WEBDAV session.  Howard
Palmer led discussion on WEBDAV access control by presenting a series
of slides highlighting design issues.  One thread discussed the
problem of underlying repositories having access control schemes which
vary (e.g., by operating system), the difficulty of mapping different
schemes into each other, and the challenge this poses for WEBDAV
access control.  No consensus was reached (none was expected) and
discussion on access control will continue on the mailing list.
</body>
</html>
