<HTML>
<HEAD>
<TITLE>Hyperweb Server Info Tab in the Hyperweb Manager</TITLE>
</HEAD>

<BODY>

<P><a href="index.html">Home</a></P>

<H2>Hyperweb Server Info Tab</H2>

<P>This tab displays information about the website's Hyperweb Server. In
particular, it indicates if the Hyperweb server is currently active. If
so, this tab will display the name of the Hyperweb Server's host along
with the number of its communications port. Otherwise it will indicate
that the Hyperweb Server is currently inactive.</P>

<CENTER><IMG SRC="../images/hwm/hws_info.gif" WIDTH="494"
HEIGHT="191"></CENTER>

<H3>Operations</H3>

<p>Two operations are available on this tab depending on the state of
the connection with the Hyperweb Server. If the Hyperweb Server is
connected, the <b>Unmanage Webs</b> command will disconnect it.
Otherwise the <b>Manage Webs</b> command will activate it. These
commands are available via the button at the bottom of the tab. It
toggles between the two operations such that both commands are available
from the same button.</p>

<H4>Using the Unmanage Webs button</H4>

<p>The <B>Unmanage Webs</B> operation deactivates the connected Hyperweb
Server.  It is only available when the Hyperweb Server is connected to
the Hyperweb Manager.</p>

<p>Example: Click the <B>Unmanage Webs</B> button to deactivate the
Hyperweb Server.</P>

<CENTER><IMG SRC="../images/hwm/hws_info.gif" WIDTH="494"
HEIGHT="191"></CENTER>

<p>The tab responds by listing the Hyperweb Server as inactive.</p>

<CENTER><IMG SRC="../images/hwm/hws_inactive.gif" WIDTH="494"
HEIGHT="191"></CENTER>

<p><b>Note:</b> All Chimera Servers connected to the Hyperweb Server
will be disconnected by the Unmanage command.</p>

<H4>Using the Manage Webs button</H4>

<p>The <B>Manage Webs</B> operation activates a new Hyperweb Server.  It
is only available when there is no active Hyperweb Server.</p>

<p>To activate a Hyperweb Server, click the <B>Manage Webs</B>
button.</p>

<p>Please be patient after clicking the <B>Manage Webs</B> button. 
Depending on your system, it may take a minute or longer to spawn a new
Hyperweb Server.</p>

<p><a href="index.html">Home</a></p>

</BODY>
</HTML>
