<!DOCTYPE html PUBLIC "-//IETF//DTD HTML 2.0//EN">
<html>
<head>
<title>Theory Seminar, Apr 6, 2007</title>
</head>
<body>
<a href="/~theory/"><img src="/~theory/logo/shortTheory.gif" width="
521" height="82" border="0" alt="ICS Theory Group"></a>

<h2>CompSci 269S, Spring 2007: Theory Seminar</h2>

<h3>Apr 6, 2007, 1:00pm, in Bren Hall 1423</h3>

<h1>
Attribute-Based Encryption: A Cryptosystem for Expressive Access Control
on Encrypted Data
</h1>

<h2>Brent Waters, SRI</h2>

<p>
<b>Abstract:</b>

<p>Several distributed file and information systems require complex
access-control mechanisms, where access decisions depend upon attributes
of the protected data and access policies assigned to users.
Traditionally, such access-control mechanisms have been enforced by a
server that acts as a trusted reference monitor; the monitor will only
allow a user to view data if his access policy allows it. While the use
of trusted servers allows for a relatively straightforward solution,
there is a large downside to this approach &mdash; both the servers and
their storage must be trusted and remain uncompromised. A natural
solution to this problem is to encrypt stored data. However, traditional
public-key encryption methods require that data be encrypted to one
particular user's public key and are unsuitable for expressing more
complex access control policies.</p>

<p>In this talk, I will present recent work on a new cryptographic
primitive, called Attribute-Based Encryption (ABE), that was created to
address this issue. Attribute-Based Encryption allows for expressive
access policies over encrypted data. In an ABE system encrypted data is
annotated with descriptive attributes and users' private keys are
ascribed access formulas over these attributes. For example, if Carol is
assigned to read and process systems-seminar messages during the year
2007, she would be ascribed the private key with the access
formula<pre>"Subj:Systems-Seminar" AND "Year:2007".</pre> I will focus
this talk on the challenges of creating ABE systems that are both secure
and efficient.  In particular, an ABE system must be secure against an
attacker that collects several private keys from different colluding
users. We also want to avoid designs that are prohibitively expensive;
for example, a solution should not include a separate public key/private
for every possible access control policy that might ever be used. In
addition, I will talk about recent efforts in implementing
Attribute-Based Encryption and making it available as a tool to be used
by researchers in systems security.</p>

</body>
</html>
