<html><head><!-- This document was created from RTF source by rtftohtml version
2.7.5 --><title>Of Lungs and Lungers: The Classified Story of
Tuberculosis</title></head><body bgcolor = "ffffff"><p>
<b></b><p>
<b>Of Lungs and Lungers: The Classified Story of Tuberculosis</b><p>
<b></b><p>
<b></b><p>
<p>
Susan Leigh Star and Geoffrey C. Bowker<p>
Graduate Schoolof Library and Information Science<p>
University of Ilinois<p>
501 East Daniel Street<p>
Champaign, IL 61820<p>
s-star1@uiuc.edu<p>
bowker@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu<p>
(217) 244-3280<p>
(217) (217) 244-3302 (Fax)<p>
<p>
Illinois Research Group on Classification<p>
University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign<p>
URL: http://alexia.lis.uiuc.edu/~star/irgchome.html<p>
<p>
<p>
Final draft:   12 October 1996<p>
<p>
<b>Acknowledgments</b><p>
<p>
Robert Dale Parker suggested several helpful references on the literary
background of women and disease in the 19th century; Marc Berg, Kirk Johnson,
Helen Verran and an anonymous referee gave us very useful comments.  Our
colleagues in the Illinois Research Group on Classification, University of
Illinois at Urbana- Champaign,  have been helpful in forming the basis for a
social analysis of classification (Niranjan Karnik, Randi Markussen, Laura
Neumann, Karen Ruhleder, Stefan Timmermans).   We also thank the Advanced
Information Technologies Group, University of Illinois,  for project support.
Conversations with Kari Thoresen about the notion of texture in organizations
were very helpful, as were ongoing conversations with Anselm Strauss about
trajectory.  The work of Mark Casey Condon on the nature of time morality in a
men's homeless shelter was helpful in thinking through issues in the concluding
section.<p>
<p>
<i>The experience of a long-term chronic illness weaves together problems in
biography, the body, and the cultural and organizational meanings of the
disease.  Time meets infrastructure; experience meets classification.  We
present here a close reading of two studies of tuberculosis, Thomas Mann's
novel The Magic Mountain  and Julius Roth's empirical work, Timetables.
Drawing on research in medical sociology and information science, we show how
the trajectories of disease, biography and institution weave together.
Mismatches in the trajectories produce distortions (or torques) in time and
sense of self, accounting for the phantasmagoric imagery often associated with
tuberculosis.  We conclude with some general observations about how the concept
of trajectory might be used in understand the intersection of biography and
organization. </i><p>
<i></i><b></b><p>
<b></b><u>Introduction</u><p>
<u></u>"<i>TB is a disease of time; it speeds up life, highlights it,
spiritualizes it.</i>" (Sontag, 1977, p.  14)<p>
<p>
	The further one stands away from the disease of tuberculosis, the more it
seems like a single, uniform phenomenon. It is associated with one of the great
philosophical breakthroughs in medicine - Koch developed his "postulates" for
defining disease agency partly with TB in mind.  Indeed, he could hardly avoid
it since epidemiologists assure us that at the time he wrote them, 1881, <i>one
seventh of all reported human deaths</i>, and one third of deaths of
"productive middle age" groups were attributable to TB (Brock, 1988, pp. 117,
179-180, emphasis added). Yet this single disease, the holocaust of those in
their prime, has historically proved an elusive thing to classify.  The work of
classification has involved at many levels a complex ecology between
localization, standardization and time.<p>
	TB also holds an important place in popular culture.  For example, the gambler
Doc Holliday was a legendary "gunslinger" and partner of Wyatt Earp and his
brother, the famed American Wild West law enforcers. He suffered from TB, and a
number of movies and books portray him with the disease. <p>
<i>	"Lunger," screams the outlaw at Doc Holliday, "come out and fight.  Prepare
to die."  Holliday appeared twice recently on the big screen, in the Hollywood
films "Tombstone" and "Wyatt Earp."  In both, his pale face, glistening with
sweat,  is used as a counterpoint to his devil-may-care lifestyle and his
gun-happy camaraderie with the Earps.  The six years he spent in a sanitarium
at the end of his life in Glenwood Springs ,Colorado go unexplored.  His
tombstone there reads, "He died in bed."  As a final irony in the story of
romancing disease, localization, and macho myth, another stone reads, "Here
lies Doc Holliday whose body is buried somewhere in this cemetery."  It seems
the body was hidden after he died from potential revenge-seekers; its exact
whereabouts has been lost in the records.</i><a
href="tb_fn.html#fn0">[1]</a><i></i><p>
<i>	</i>Body-snatching and the failure to reach a final localized resting place
permeate the history of tuberculosis.  As we proceed with this story, the
interweaving of myth, biography, science, medicine and bureaucracy becomes
thicker and thicker, eluding attempts at standardization and localization from
every angle.  Just for this reason, though, the story of TB holds some profound
insights about how those threads intertwine, tense against each other, and form
the texture of a landscape of time.  <p>
	We bring a number of intellectual tools to the analysis of this landscape.
Social studies of science have moved to crisscross nature, culture (including
artifacts) and discourse in a seamless web (Latour, 1993); activity theory adds
the concept of mediation for tools, cognition and community.  We emphasize as
well the importance of ongoing hybrid arrangements, in the form of
infrastructures of classification and bureaucracy (Bowker, Timmermans &amp;
Star, 1995; Bowker &amp; Star, 1994; Star &amp; Ruhleder, 1996; Star, 1995). We
draw as well on some concepts from medical sociology:  notions of
body-biography-trajectory (Corbin &amp; Strauss, 1988; 1991) and the temporal
lessons of chronic illness (Charmaz, 1992). We seek to re-center the ways in
which time and infrastructure interact, to illuminate the texture of this web
so crisscrossed with great divides that in literature and popular myth, the
whole borderland has taken on a phantasmagoric shape, unrecognizable to those
undergoing the experience. <p>
<p>
<u>Part 1 Classification</u><p>
	The question has often been posed in the social and cultural study of
medicine: whose body is it anyway that is getting analyzed? (Berg &amp; Bowker,
in press)  This question is as old as the development of statistics (Hacking,
1990):  Quetelet sought for the "ideal type" in a statistical analysis of a
regiment of Scottish soldiers. With tuberculosis, the  body is constantly in
motion,  and the disease is constantly in motion.  The disease may be localized
or spread throughout the body; the state or general condition of the body and
of the person's life enters into the treatment regime, which may take months
and historically has taken years or a lifetime.  Thus,  any classification
system should include both spatial and temporal dimensions, but standardized
classifications tend to emphasize space alone.  That is, classifications are
rarely  developmental, and often presented as spatial demographic
distributions.  Even where stages of a disease may be categorized, these stages
are abstracted away from biographical continuity and more subtle temporal
issues.  As the problems of time emerge in the lives of patients and the work
of classifiers, those spatial compartments break down in interesting ways: a
formal hierarchy of mutually exclusive categories becomes a set of overlapping
contradictory classes. The formal thesis of this paper is that when the work of
classification abstracts away the flow of historical time, then the goal of
standardization can only be achieved at the price of leakages in the
classification system (cf. Hacking, 1995). Under certain conditions, the
shifting terrain between standardized classification and the situated biography
of the patient is <i>twisted</i> across an axis of negotiation, scientific work
and instruments, suffering, and time.<p>
	<u>1.1 The disease is constantly in motion</u><p>
<u></u>	Tuberculosis is a moving target. It is often presented as the great
epidemic disease with a cure - heralding the famous optimism (ironically, just
as AIDS was developing and newly-resistant strains of TB on the rise) that
epidemic disease could be eradicated from the planet.  In September 1994 the
World Health Organization made a worldwide press release predicting the
eradication of polio from the planet by the year 2000
(http://www.who.ch/programmes/gpv/tEnglish/avail/polio.htm).   A year earlier
sociologist Fred Davis, who suffered polio in his youth, and one of the  most
eloquent analysts of uncertainty in illness (Davis, 1963) died of a stroke at
the age of 65 -- was this stroke in part the legacy of his earlier illness?
Many of those who had polio in the 1940s and 1950s are now beginning to lose
their ability to walk as their overburdened spinal cells, designed for backup
purposes, are wearing out after years of tough therapy and rehabilitation.   Is
the disease thus eradicated -- or delayed?  In the lives of these patients, the
answer is not so clear. And they remain invisible to the original
classifications.<p>
	As Barbara Bates has pointed out (Bates, 1992, pp. 320-321) many observers
"now attribute the decline of tuberculosis chiefly to socioeconomic changes"
(pp. 320-321). A historically fully contingent rise in standard of living
accompanied by less crowded conditions in the cities possibly worked the real
miracle. Others, she points out, offer a more brutal, but still completely
historical cause for the cure: they argue that it is a matter of natural
selection, and what has happened is simply that those humans most susceptible
to the disease are now dead. This sort of convergence is a problem in much
scientific and medical research,  and increasingly so (Bowker, 1994; Timmermans
&amp; Berg, in press; Latour, 1993).   Here we have a "global truth" - the cure
for TB - that may have been true because the "fitter ones survived"  (the
susceptible members died out) <i>or</i> because human environments changed
(better living conditions) <i>or</i> because there is now an allopathic cure.<a
href="tb_fn.html#fn0">[2]</a> It is impossible to decide between these three
causes, since according to the first two humanity before the "cure" (whichever
one plumps for) is not the same thing as humanity after the cure - either the
race will have changed biologically or the infrastructure that makes us know
what we are will have altered.<p>
	The disease has its own history, a broken and contested path. In a series of
works put out by the National Tuberculosis Association from 1950 to the
present, TB often figures wryly as an actor in the text: much as Roy Porter
(1990) has noted that "gout" in the eighteenth century had a character of its
own. Thus the 1961 edition of the Diagnostic Standards and Classification of
Tuberculosis noted that: <p>
<p>
For our present purposes, therefore, tuberculosis is defined as that infectious
disease caused by one of several closely related mycobacteria, including M
tuberculosis, M. bovis, and M. avium. It usually involves the lungs, but it
also involves and sometimes produces gross lesions in other organs and tissues.
The clinical and pathologic pictures may range from acute to chronic. (p. vi)
<p>
<p>
	TB taken as an agent traverses history and human bodies, taking hold in some
and leaving others in a contingent historical progression, reaffirming the
uneven, hierarchical value given to different patient's lives (Glaser &amp;
Strauss, 1965). The disease hits at different points in the life cycle (ibid.,
p.  6); thus becomes a complex mirror composed of nature, culture, discourse
and infrastructure.  <p>
	<u>1. 2 The body is constantly in motion</u><p>
	The development of X-rays was perhaps the most significant breakthrough in the
detection and diagnosis of tuberculosis (Pasveer, 1989). Unfortunately, the
body itself is constantly in motion and varies by individual: so the ideal
measurement is always a projection from a moving picture onto a timeless chart:
<p>
<p>
The perfect chest roentgenogram . . . is the aim of those who practice
roentgenology. The very nature of the problem prevents the realization of this
aim. The chest is a moving, dynamic part of the body and cannot be completely
still. It varies from person to person. In some it is thin and easy to
penetrate. In others it is thick and heavy from fat or muscle and hard to
penetrate. Some lungs are stiff and hard to inflate. Others are made full and
voluminous without great effort. To register lungs satisfactorily with these
variables is at all times difficult. (Diagnostic Standards, 1955, p.  71) <p>
<p>
	Further, each body subject to TB is going through its own biographical and
physiological, historical development - and as it develops TB changes. Thus:
"the clinical picture of serious necrotic lesions of primary tuberculosis and
widespread disseminations from them is observed more often in infancy than in
later life and more frequently in nonwhite than in white persons." (Diagnostic
Standards, 1955, p. 17). Thomas Mann describes one of the TB sanitarium.
patients in <i>The Magic Mountain: </i>responding to another's new diagnosis of
a "moist spot": <i> </i><p>
<i></i>You can't tell," Joachim said.  "That is just what you never can tell.
They said you had already had places, of which nobody took any notice and they
healed of themselves, and left nothing but a few trifling dullnesses.  It might
have been the same way with the moist spot you are supposed to have now, if you
hadn't come up here at all.  One can never know.  (Mann, 1929, p.192)<p>
<p>
<p>
	Not only the disease and the body, but also the patient's experience moves
constantly. Thus Bates points out that institutionalization in a sanitarium may
well have worked because the relationships with nurses, doctors and other
patients - together with removal from bad home conditions - may have done the
work. She summarizes: "Psychological factors have long been thought to alter
the course of tuberculosis, but their actual impact on outcomes is not
known..." (Bates, 1992, p. 320).<p>
<p>
	<u>1.3  Classification: a still life constantly in motion</u><p>
	With all these historical trajectories being inscribed into the course of
tuberculosis at whatever unit of analysis one took (humanity, the disease, the
body or the experience of the patient) it will come as no surprise that the
work of classifying tuberculosis has generally had very complex temporal
ramifications; and these ramifications have often led to problems in
classification.  It has also led to a sense by those in sanatoria of TB as
inhabiting a phantasmagoric landscape, a borderland filled with monstrous
experiences and distortions of time and self (Mann, 1929; Roth, 1963).  The
reasons for this are not simply the physical horrors of the disease, though
those are terrible enough, but the ways in which our strands play out against
each other in imagination.  <p>
	One wants to classify tuberculosis first and foremost in order to say yeah or
nay, whether a particular patient has the disease. This information can be used
in order to suggest a treatment plan for the patient, and a map of action for
officials in public health (Should we  quarantine, isolate, educate, or give
antibiotics?)  This classification work is not easy. In the first place, the
disease itself is multifaceted:  "When faced with a difficult diagnosis, the
clinician does well to keep tuberculosis in mind, for its mode of onset and
course are protean. This needs to be urged all the more now that tuberculosis
is becoming relatively less frequent." (Diagnosis, 1955, p. 23)<p>
	Further, it does not have a single cause: most TB in humans, according to
official accounts, is caused by mycobacterium tuberculosis, but one should not
forget mycobacterium bovis and mycobacterium avium. It does not appear in a
single place - generally the lungs are affected, but it could produce lesions
in many other organs and tissues. Star (1989) notes that the disease's spread
implicated it in all investigations of nervous and brain disease in the
nineteenth century; whether a patient had a brain or spinal tumor or TB was
often unclear; the disease may cause seizures, paralysis, lameness or dementia.
Thomas Mann poses of one of his characters:  "the question whether the disease
would be arrested by a chalky petrifaction and heal by means of fibrosis, or
whether it would extend the area, create still larger cavities, and destroy the
organ." (Mann, 1929, p.447)<p>
	And indeed even pulmonary TB - its most common form and one of the greatest
killers in the history of humanity - cannot be simply classified: <p>
<p>
The lesions of tuberculosis are highly diverse in appearance, and their
manifestations are numerous. No single system of classification can give
information which completely describes the lesions. Certain classifications and
descriptions are needed, however, for records and for statistical purposes...
the status of a patient's disease at the time of diagnosis, and at any time in
the months and years thereafter. These basic classifications should be used for
all cases. (Diagnosis, 1961, p. 39)<p>
	<p>
And they recommend that this basic classification should tell a story,
detailing extent of disease, status of clinical activity, bacteriologic status,
therapeutic status, exercise status and other "lifestyle" variables as they are
called nowadays. <p>
	Medical classification work as based on the International Classification of
Diseases (ICD), however, does not tell a story - it records a fact (one died of
the disease or not). 3  There is a complex narrative written into the death
certificate that is the primary outcome of the ICD: doctors and later health
workers must sift multiple causes of death to determine proximate, contributing
and underlying causes (Fagot-Largeault, 1989). But this is an impoverished
story, with only a small range of contributing causes. The ICD cannot contain a
protean disease.<a href="tb_fn.html#fn1">[4]</a>  It is oriented towards a
cause-and-effect that resembles a set of slots or bins, or blanks on a form,
even where it is multi-valanced and multi-slotted; it is not, like disease and
diagnosis, messy, leaky, liquid, and textured with time.  Indeed, the problem
of tuberculosis has been a long-standing problem for the ICD - leading to the
convening of several special committees to produce a standard (Biraben,
1988).<p>
	Standard medical classifications, though they may leak at the edges and become
configurationally complex, do not reflect the temporal complexity of the
disease itself (Clarke  &amp; Casper, 1996). They do not represent its
composite, amodern nature:  culture, nature, discourse and infrastructure.
They posit a single answer to the question of whether this person has TB or
not.  However, as Desrosi&egrave;res (1993, p. 296) has pointed out with
respect to <i>all</i> statistical work, this kind of difficulty leads to a
contradiction between a logical, top-down approach which accounts for all
traits, and a local, pragmatic one which registers the phenomenon as locally
encountered.  It is one of the purest forms of a deduction vs. induction
debate.<a href="tb_fn.html#fn2">[5]</a> <p>
	For most of the nineteenth century - and into the twentieth - TB was believed
to be hereditary.  What was classified was a tuberculoid kind of a person, a
temperament: romantic, melancholy, given to emotional extremes, hot cheeked and
so on.  Sontag notes that just before Koch discovered the tubercule bacillus, a
standard medical text gave the cause of TB as  "hereditary disposition,
unfavorable climate, sedentary indoor life, defective ventilation, deficiency
of light, and `depressing emotions.' "(1977, p.  54)  She also writes of the
literary and popular cultural images of TB, noting that many writers have
referred to TB as "ethereal," "chaste," and somehow pure and mental, not
physical.   "TB is celebrated as the disease of born victims, of sensitive,
passive people who are not quite life-loving enough to survive." (1977, p.  25)
In some circles in the nineteenth century, this became a romantic image,
especially for middle-class white women:  "The recurrent figure of the
tubercular courtesan indicates that TB was also thought to make the sufferer
sexy."  (1977, p.25).  Eventually, this romance bled over into a more diffuse
concept of style of life and crafting of self.  Sontag even states:   "The
romanticizing of TB is the first widespread example of that distinctively
modern activity, promoting the self as an image.  The tubercular look had to be
considered attractive once it came to be considered a mark of distinction, of
breeding."  (p. 29) The mythic person with TB became a romantic exile, and the
myth "supplied an important model of bohemian life, lived without or without
the vocation of the artist.  The TB sufferer was a dropout, a wanderer in
endless search of the healthy place." (p. 33)<p>
	The work of finding a cure thus involved myriad classificatory activities
inserted into a shifting ecology of metrologies and images about temperament
and constitution (Star, 1995).  Bates (1992, p. 28) notes that members of the
Climatological Association in the 1920s compiled measures of altitude,
humidity, temperature, sunlight, dampness of the soil, ozone in the air and
emanations from pine and balsam forests in order to uncover and classify the
ideal placement for sanitarium situation. As she somewhat sardonically notes,
though, a skeptic: "might notice that many of the otherwise disparate
conclusions shared one characteristic: physicians tended to discover
health-giving attributes in their own locales" (p. 28).<p>
	It was (and is) also not clear when to <i>stop</i> classifying TB. As the
following report on Bergey's manual of determinative bacteriology notes -
apparently without irony - there is a need to bring order into the
classification "unclassified" when talking about TB.  the manual lists four
subtypes  of unclassified strains ( (Diagnostic Standards, 1961, p. 17)  So one
can have an "other" or residual category, but at some point even the garbage
can will have to be ordered, when it becomes large enough.<p>
	Further, the committee on the classification of tuberculosis was forced to
recognize in general that: "all classifications are ephemeral" (Diagnosis,
1955, p. 6 - quoting the 1950 edition). They fully recognized the temporary,
agreed-upon nature of their classification work.   In infrastructural work such
as the development of classification systems,  there is much greater
sensitivity to such factors than appears in the published scientific papers:
"Complete agreement . . .  is impossible . . . The classification presented
represents a well- considered compromise of the views of outstanding
clinicians."(Diagnosis, 1955, p. 5 - quoting the 1950 edition). <p>
	Indeed, the historiography presented by the texts of diagnostic handbooks was
a mixture of pure Whiggish progress tinged with despair ("without roentgenology
the fight against TB would be back where is was in the nineteenth century" -
Diagnosis, 1961, p.67) and a cyclical view of history that Vico would not have
been ashamed to espouse:<p>
<p>
Readers will note another of those shifts in emphasis which have characterized
expositions of the pathogenesis of tuberculosis for thirty-five years. The
concepts presented in the current edition are more closely allied to those of
former years than to the views expressed in the last edition. (Diagnostic
Standards, 1955, p. 7)<p>
<p>
Or again, from the 1961 edition:<p>
<p>
The one item of change upon which all of our consultants agreed was the need
for a classification to include the increasing number of cases which are
neither truly "active" nor "inactive," and, chiefly, cases of the "open
negative syndrome." In defining such a new class and seeking a suitable name
for it, we have reached back ten years and reinstated the once-retired term,
"quiescent," which was previously applied to an intermediate class. (Diagnostic
Standards, 1961, p. v)<p>
<p>
This example moves us into the terrain of tuberculosis and activity, which we
will consider in the next section. For our purposes here, though, it
underscores the situation of the classification act in an historical flow,
where the pure progress of natural science is transmogrified by time,
biography, institutions, and myth.<p>
<u></u><p>
<u>Part 2 Freeze Frames: Snapshots of a Disease in Progress</u><cite></cite><p>
<cite></cite><i>A positive skin test does NOT mean that you have tuberculosis;
rather, that you may have been exposed to the organisms at some time in the
past.  In this case, a chest x-ray must be obtained in order to be certain
there is no active disease. Additionally, if the reaction is positive, we will
want to review your history and talk to you about what you should do in the
future.  --</i> Information given to students by the health center at the
University of Illinois.  (c)University of Illinois Board of Trustees <p>
<b></b><p>
<b></b>	Throughout the history of tuberculosis classification, one of the key
problems has been how to convert a progressive, protean disease to a single
mark on a sheet of paper. Many categories have been experimented with. One
suggested hallmark was whether or not one tested positive to the tuberculin
test. But as with HIV, it was decided that those who tested positive did not
<i>have</i> the disease, they were: "considered to have tuberculous infection
but not disease" (Diagnosis, 1955, p. 25). Only those who could bring other
evidence of disease to the table would be considered worthy of the
classification of pulmonary and non pulmonary tuberculosis.<p>
	Those who did have the disease, could be lumped into the categories
inactive/active/activity undetermined. However, if: a "provisional estimate of
the probable clinical status is necessary for public health purposes, the terms
(a) "Probably Active" or (b) "Probably Inactive" should be used. Every effort
should be made to classify cases and to avoid this category" (Diagnostic
Standards, 1955, p. 28). By 1961, it was agreed that a classification somewhere
between active and inactive was needed: this would be the "open negative
syndrome" and would, as we have just seen, have the word "quiescent" attached
to it. "Inactive" would be redefined to include: "constant and definite
healing".  Ironically, and to underscore the attempt to separate disease from
biography,  "dead" was also recognized in this classification (p. 41) -
presumably to stand as a cross between highly active and completely inactive!<p>
	Bubbling out of the freeze frame with these leakages are the struggles with a
shifting infrastructure of classification and treatment. Turning now to other
presentations and classifications of TB by a novelist and a sociologist, we
will see the complex dialectic of irrevocably local biography and of standard
classification.  <p>
<u>Part 3:  Moving Through Tuberculosis and Its Classification</u><p>
<u></u>	The next sections rely on two detailed  readings of classic studies of
TB sanatoria and hospitals.  The first is Thomas Mann's <i>The Magic
Mountain</i> (1929),  written in 1912, a 900+ -page tome chronicling a Swiss
hospital and the 7-year sojourn of a young German engineer there, Hans Castorp.
The account was based on Mann's experience as a visitor to a similar
institution during his wife's incarceration for lung disease.  The second is
Julius Roth's <i>Timetables</i>, a comparative ethnographic analysis of several
American TB hospitals in the late 1950s.  This volume, too, has a strong base
in Roth's own experience as a TB patient while he was writing his doctoral
dissertation. <p>
	<u>3.1 The texture of time:  Lost to the world</u><p>
	When Hans Castorp, the hero of Mann's novel,  arrives in the Alps as a visitor
to his tubercular cousin, one of his first lessons in local culture is the way
that values about time change for those "up here."  Everything normal seems to
change for him, and the whole place seems macabre and oddly funny.   Later in
the novel he will explain to another newcomer:  "I have no contact with the
flat-land, it has fallen away.  We have a folk-song that says:  "I am lost to
the world" -- so it is with me."  (Mann, 1929, p. 614)  This lostness first
takes on the form of time passing very slowly, and in chunks that seem
unimaginable to the newcomer:   "We up here are not acquainted with such an
unit of time as the week - if I may be permitted to instruct  you, my dear sir.
Our smallest unit is the month.  We reckon in the grand style -- that is a
privilege we shadows have." (Mann, 1929, p. 59) <p>
	Roth compares the commitment to a TB sanitarium with having an "indeterminate
sentence" for one's first year of jail -- not <i>knowing</i> how long one will
be incarcerated, not having any milestones or turning points that make sense,
also makes time seem endless, and distorted with respect to known landscapes,
both inner and outer. "Where uniformity rules; and where motion is no more
motion, time is no longer time." (Mann, 1929, p.566)<p>
	The patients in both Mann's and Roth's hospitals begin to speculate on the
meaning of this lost time, this "time out."  Is time real, objective, something
which can be measured externally -- or subjective, illusory?  Hans originally
opts for a relativist explanation:  "After all, time <i>isn't</i> 'actual.'
When it seems long to you, then it is long; when it seems short, why, then it
is short.  But how long, or how short, it actually is, that nobody knows."
(Mann, 1929, p. 66)  His cousin Joachim, a rather hard-nosed soldier who wants
only to get off of the mountain and back to his regiment, disagrees, and says
"We have watches and calendars for the purpose; and when a month is up, why
then up it is, for you, and for me, and for all of us." (Mann, 1929, p.66)
Hans proceeds to demonstrate how slowly seven minutes can go by while taking
one's temperature, and we indeed feel the seconds creep by in Mann's precise
language.  What is "the same?"  he asks.  "The schoolmen of the Middle Ages
would have it that time is an illusion; that its flow in sequence and causality
is only the result of a sensory device, and their real existence of things in
an abiding present." (Mann, 1929, p.566) <p>
	As time goes on, up on the magic mountain and in each of the hospitals studied
by Roth, people inside begin to develop a sense of how to fragment, break up
this unbroken monolith.  "We are aware that the intercalation of periods of
change and novelty is the only means by which we can refresh our sense of time,
strengthen, retard, and rejuvenate it, and therewith renew our perception of
life itself." (Mann, 1929, p. 107) In one of his many meditations on the nature
of time, Mann argues that time and action and space are not separable --
nothing "fills up" time in a platonic-container sense, but that these facets
are only knowable with respect to each other: <p>
<p>
What is time?  A mystery, a figment -- and all powerful.  It conditions the
exterior world, it is motion married to and mingled with the existence of
bodies in space, and with the  motion of these.  Would there then be no time if
there were no motion?  No motion if no time?   We fondly ask.  Is time a
function of space?  Or space of time?  Or are they identical?  Echo answers.
Time is functional, it can be referred to as action; we say a thing is "brought
about" by time.  What sort of thing?  Change? (Mann, 1929, p.  356)<p>
<p>
	At the core of this theory of action is the development of what Roth calls
"timetables," and which is alluded to in more symbolic terms by Mann.
Timetables are breaks in space-time which give meaning to action.  They are
constructed mediational tools which help order and control mismatches between
institution and individual.  When will I get out? What will become of me?   How
will I survive the boredom and the uncertainty of incarceration?  Such
questions are asked against the specter of unbroken time or eternity, or as
Roth's patients and doctors put it for the hopeless cases: "a rather horrifying
tubercular Siberia -- a seemingly endless waster (of time) without any
signposts along the way." (Roth, 1963, p. 21)  or in Mann's words:  ""Only in
time was there progress; in eternity there was none, nor any politics or
eloquence either."  (Mann, 1929, p.479) <a href="tb_fn.html#fn3">[6]</a><p>
	Gradually a sense that there is in fact no such thing as unbroken time comes
about for the patients:<p>
Can one tell -- that is to say, narrate -- time, time itself, as such, for its
own sake?  That would surely be an absurd undertaking.  A story which read:
"time passed, it ran on, the time flowed onward" and so forth -- no one in his
senses could consider that a narrative....For narration resembles music in
this, that it <i>fills up</i> the time.  It "fills it in" and "breaks it up,"
so that "there's something to it," "something going on." (Mann, 1929, p.560)<p>
<p>
	The patients begin to fill their days with measurement.  On the magic
mountain, people walk around with thermometers in their mouths, measuring their
temperatures several times a day; in both books, patients are conversant with
the details of diagnosis and measurement, the myriad of ways in which the
monolithic diagnosis may be broken up and measured.  As Roth says:  "Everyone
is frantically trying to find out how long <i>he</i> is in for.  The new
patient questions the doctors, nurses, and other hospital personnel in an
effort to discover how may years, months, and days it will take <i>him</i> to
be cured." (1963, p. xvi)<p>
<b>	</b><u>3.2 Metrology</u><b></b><p>
<b>	</b>The importance of mediational tools appears in struggles with
measurement.<b>  </b>One woman has been a patient on the magic mountain for the
better part of her life.  Eventually, she is cured of the disease and told to
go home.  But she knows no other life, and panics at the thought of leaving.<a
href="tb_fn.html#fn3">[7]</a><b>   </b>She sabotages her release:  runs out in
the snow, jumps in the lake, and sticks her thermometer into her tea to make
her appear feverish.  When she is discovered by the staff, they make her use a
thermometer without any marks on it.  The device can only be read by a doctor
with a measuring stick.  The patient thus cannot calibrate her faking illness.
The patients come to call  this unmarked instrument "the silent sister," and it
becomes the symbol for the ways in which the world of the asylum acquires its
own bizarre culture of metrication and control.<p>
	Roth notes that patients are quite systematic in creating measurements for the
blocks of time they will spend in the asylum.  They begin to construct
timetables for themselves (I will get out in six months; I will have surgery in
two weeks, etc.)  "After they have been in the hospital for some time, they
find that "mild" and "bad" are not very meaningful categories," and much more
detailed matching categories develop. (Roth, 1963, p.19)  Patients begin
observing how other patients are treated.  There is an elaborate system of
privileges in TB hospitals, based ostensibly on how healthy one is. If one is
making good progress, for example, one is allowed out on brief shopping trips,
and so forth.  "He divides the patient group into categories, according to his
predictions about/the course of their treatment.  He can then attach himself to
one of these categories and thus have a more precise notion of what is likely
to happen to him than he could from simply following the more general norms."
(Roth, 1963, pp. 16-17) <p>
	Roth goes on to describe an equally elaborate system of observations and
comparisons made by all the patients with respect to their own bodies, the
length of time "served," the predilections of the individual doctors, and the
technical diagnostic material such as x-rays.  Not surprisingly, much of the
information available is partial or misleading: <p>
<p>
Reference points may be more or less clear-cut and stable.  If they are
prescribed in detail and rigidly adhered to, as in the career of pupils in a
school system, one's movement through the timetable is almost completely
predictable.  As the reference points become less rigid and less clear-cut,
they must be discovered and interpreted through observation and through
interaction with others of one's career group.  The more unclear the reference
points are, the harder it is for members of a career group to know where they
stand in relation to others and the more likely it is that they will  attend to
inappropriate clues and thus make grossly inaccurate predictions concerning
future progress.  The degree of stability is related in part to the changes in
timetables through time.  (Roth, 1963, pp. 99-100) <p>
<p>
Managing this instability increases the intensity of comparison and a sense,
often, of bewilderment, unfairness, or even madness.  Hans Castorp says to his
cousin:  <p>
<p>
I cannot comprehend why, with a harmless fever -- assuming for the moment, that
there is such a thing -- one must keep one's bed, while with one that is not
harmless you needn't.  And secondly, I tell you the fever has not made me
hotter than I was before.  My position is that 99.6deg. is 99.6deg..  If you
can run about with it, so can I." (Mann, 1929, p.176)<p>
<p>
	Give me a standard, give me something to hold on to, something clear - in the
face of uncertainty, patients become positivists.  Mann describes the rebellion
of Hans' cousin again the system of metrication in the hospital, the "Gaffky
score."  This is a composite score for each patient's progress based on a
number of measures:  <p>
<p>
Yes, the good, the patient, the upright Joachim, so affected to discipline and
the service, had been attacked by fits of rebellion, he even questioned the
authority of the "Gaffky scale."  Whether only a few isolated bacilli, or a
whole host of them, were found in the sputum analyzed, determined his "Gaffky
number," upon which everything depended.  It infallibly reflected the chances
of recovery with which the patient had to reckon; the number of months or years
he must still remain could with ease be deduced from it. (Mann, 1929, p.357)<p>
This questioning of authority  appears inevitable in a landscape so filled with
uncertainty.  One character, a business person,  attempts to quantify health
care costs and the tradeoffs: <p>
<p>
The expense, he whispered, was fixed at a thousand francs, including the
anesthesia of the spinal cord; practically the whole thoracic cavity was
involved, six or eight ribs, and the question was whether it would pay . . . he
was not at all clear that he would not do better just to die in peace, with his
ribs intact.  (Mann, 1929, p.315)<p>
<p>
	In the absence of metrics such as this, however, the relationships between
doctors and patients come under considerable strain as patients strive to
assign themselves to the proper categories, and then to see whether the doctors
agree with them (Berg, 1992).  In <i>The Magic Mountain</i>,  the inmate
Settembrini, a slightly satanic character, whispers constantly to Hans about
how subjective the reading of the objective measures such as x-rays really is:
<p>
<p>
You know too that those spots and shadows there are very largely of
physiological origin.  I have seen a hundred such pictures, looking very like
this of yours; the decision as to whether they offered definite proof or not
was left more or less to the discretion of the person looking at them. (Mann,
1929, p.250)<p>
<p>
	Both physicians and patients struggle to find a standard and to localize it,
in the face of a constantly shifting interpretive frame.  As Roth notes:  <p>
<p>
The physician finds it difficult to carry out the medical ideal of an
individual prescription for each case when at the same time he recognizes the
fact that his timing of a given treatment event for a given patient is to a
large extent a highly uncertain judgment on his part.  If you are going to
guess, you might as well make the process more efficient by guessing about the
same way each time, especially if you are in a situation where your clients are
likely to think that you do not know what you are doing if you change your
guess from one time to another. (1963, p.24) <p>
<p>
This uncertainty leads to the struggles and negotiations that are at the heart
of Roth's analysis. Whose timetable will prevail?<p>
	<u>3.3 Classification struggles:  Putting in time</u><p>
	"The TB patient conceives of his treatment largely in terms of putting in time
rather than in terms of the changes that occur in his lungs." (Roth, 1963, p.
xv)  The length of time one has been inside, combined with patients'
observations about where they  belong in the general scheme of things, acquires
a moral character over time: <p>
A classification system contains within it a series of restrictions and
privileges.  When no rigid classification system exists, these privileges
themselves become part of the timetable . . . How long is it before he is
allowed two hour a day "up time" [out of bed]? . . . <i>these privileges are
desired not only in themselves, but for their symbolic value</i>.  They are
signs that the treatment is progressing, that the patient is getting closer to
discharge. (Roth, 1963, p.4) <p>
<p>
	Timetable norms differ from hospital to hospital and from patient to patient.
Trust, often in the form of moral condemnation or approval, may play a big part
in structuring the timetable negotiations between doctor and patient.  For
example, alcoholic patients are often refused outside passes, or sometimes a
patient with a "recalcitrant attitude" is refused a pass simply in order to
convince them that he or she really <i>is</i> very ill.  These moralizing
attitudes, well documented within medical sociology, add another texture to the
landscape we are examining here, twisting it a little away from a simple
formal-situated or realist-relativist axis.<p>
	Doctors as well as patients may hold the "deserving" attitude toward someone
who has "served their time."  Roth notes that in treatment conferences, how
long the patient has been confined is always taken into account in deciding the
timetable, "this in itself is given considerable weight entirely aside from the
bacteriological and X-ray data." (1963, p.27) Even those who seem to be getting
better much faster according to these tests are kept in longer because, "TB
just isn't cured that fast." (p.27)<b></b><p>
<b>	</b>Patients know almost to the day when which privileges will arrive:
"This relative precision of the timetable results from the emphasis placed upon
the classification system by the staff, the consistency in the decisions of the
physician in charge, and the physician explicitness in telling the patients
what they can expect in the future." (Roth, 1963, p. 7) <p>
There can be a "failure to be promoted" in severe cases, and the reaction to
this "varies greatly among TB patients, just as among engineers some of the
failures are emotionally disorganized when they do not make the grade while
others accept their inferior position with relative equanimity.  Some patients
regard a few days' delay as a tragedy." (Roth, 1963, p. 15) Bargains are made:
"Patients <i>are </i> sometimes given regular and frequent passes to induce
them to remain in the hospital." (p. 53)<p>
	Uncertainty plays a big role in negotiations about classification in the
hospital.  When a patient tries to guess their classification, and the
physician disagrees, "In effect, the physician tries to get Jones to change his
criteria for grouping patients so that his categories will be closer to those
of the physician." (Roth, 1963, p. 39)  The doctor will provide the patient
with examples of others like him or her, and relates details about other
similar cases.  But the physician too is caught in a double bind: ethically he
or she is not allowed to give <i>too</i> many details about others' cases.  The
doctor is thus reduced to vague generalizations like "No two cases are alike."
(ibid., p. 39)  for the patient, this contributes to the house-of-mirrors
effect:<p>
Most physicians . . . vary their approach from one patient to another according
to their own judgment of what the patient can take . . . the physicians do not
know with any precision how long it will take the patient to reach a given
level of control over his disease.  In order to allow themselves a freer hand
in deciding what the best time is for the patient to leave the hospital, the
doctors try to avoid being pinned down to any precise estimates by the
patients. (Roth, 1963, p.45 )<p>
<p>
	This twisting effect of these silences is especially clear where the norms
about timetables are also shifting, either due to changes in medical practice,
technology, staff, or organizational change.  One patient in these circumstance
said:    " You never seem to get anywhere because people here don't pay too
much attention to the classifications.  I've been here now since November and
I'm still in Group 1.  My husband comes to visit me and looks at this tag and
thinks I'm never going to get promoted.  He wonders what's going on.  Then when
you <i>do </i> get promoted to Group 2, you don't know what it means, anyway.
You have no idea what additional privileges you have . . . <i>It's like an
ungraded school room</i>. " (Roth, 1963, p.10) <p>
	The ungraded schoolroom, combined with uncertainties, shifts in bureaucracy,
and changes in the person's biography, begin to form the tapestry of a
monstrous existence.  <p>
<u>Part 4. Borderlands and Monsters:  Time's Torquing of Standards and
Experience</u><p>
	<i>Greta Garbo as Camille drifts across the screen in a cloud of white
organza.</i><a href="tb_fn.html#fn3">[8]</a><i>  She is alternately cruel and
flirtatious, vulnerable and powerful.  She plays with the affections of her
lovers, a baron and a struggling young diplomat, from her position as a farm
girl who came to Paris.  Early in the movie, we understand that she has been
ill; from time to time she discreetly covers her mouth with a handkerchief, or
seems to swoon (always artistically). At times she recovers, and in a rhythm
complexly played out against her wardrobe, she moves from white to black in
dress, from sick to well, from powerful to powerless, from country to city.  As
the movie progresses she becomes more and more ill, and more and more "pure" --
thinner, whiter, more in love with the worthy poor man and less with the
nefarious rich Baron.  During the whole course of the movie, no one speaks the
name of her illness, any prognosis or diagnosis, nor do we see any blood,
sputum, feces, or other despoiling of the purified background.  Of course, she
has tuberculosis -- and she is the ideal type, the shadow puppet against which
both the medical story and the rich cultural criticisms of TB have been played
out. </i><p>
<i>There were those who/wanted to make him "healthy," to make him "go back to
nature," when, the truth was, he had never been "natural."</i> (Mann, 1929,
p.482)<p>
<p>
	On the magic mountain, or in any of the hospitals analyzed by Roth,  the sense
of unreality, of being outside of "normal" time and of making up an
idiosyncratic timing is very strong.  Furthermore, the very insides and
outsides of people become mixed up in an almost monstrous way; Hans carries
around his love Clavdia's x-ray in his breast pocket so that he may really know
her.  External time drops away as does one's biography: <p>
<p>
(The inhabitants) accorded to the anniversary of arrival no other attention
than that of a profound silence . . . They set store by a proper articulation
of the time, they gave heed to the calendar, observed the turning-points of the
year, its recurrent limits.  But to measure one's own private time, that time
which for the individual in these parts was so closely bound up with space --
that was held to be an occupation only fit for new arrivals and short-termers.
The settled citizens preferred the unmeasured, the eternal, the day that was
for ever the same.  (Mann, 1929, p.427)<p>
<p>
	This sense of time begins to blur important distinctions between life and
death, time and space:  "But is not this affirmation of the eternal and the
infinite the logical -mathematical destruction of every and any limit in time
or space, and the reduction of them, more or less, to zero?  is it possible, in
eternity, to conceive of a sequences of events, or in the infinite of a
succession of space-occupying bodies? " (Mann, 1929, p.356)  As we approach the
zero point in the story, Mann notes in an afterword that time-space relations
are shifted so that: "the story practices a hermetical magic, a temporal
distortion of perspective reminding one of certain abnormal and transcendental
experiences in actual life." (p. 561) In the following section we offer a model
for how such a monstrous borderland terrain is constructed.<p>
	<u>4.1 Trajectories and twists:  The texture of action</u><p>
<i>No one can ever know for certain just when tuberculosis become active or
when it becomes inactive. For that matter, one can never be certain that the
disease is inactive, and a patient could logically be kept in the hospital for
the rest of his life on the assumption hat some slight undetectable changes
might be occurring in his lungs.</i> (Roth, 1963, p.30) <p>
<p>
<i>The same train brought them as had Hans Castorp, when years ago, years that
had been neither long nor short, but timeless, very eventful yet "the sum of
nothing," he had first come to this place.</i> (Mann, 1929, p.520)<p>
<p>
<i>	</i>The model developed below has three parts (note that these are<i>
not</i> stages).  The original work of Corbin and Strauss was elaborated by
Timmermans, and in this paper, we add to both of them.  They are thus parts of
an ongoing conversation between all these authors. (For simplicity of
representation, time,  in the diagrams below appears to be a linear unfolding
along the x-axis.  Clearly, we are arguing against this simple "unfolding"
temporal structure; our own limits on drawing prevent a more complex
representation, which would probably resemble a weaving-in-motion in at least 4
dimensions!)<p>
	<u>4.1.1 Body-Biography Trajectory:  Corbin and Strauss</u>	<p>
	A model developed by Juliet Corbin and Anselm Strauss describes what happens
in the course of a chronic illness (1988, 1991).  They posit that bodies and
biographies unfold along two intertwined trajectories (the "body-biography
chain"), nestled in a matrix of other structural and interactional conditions
(Strauss, 1993).  For example,  a heart attack may temporarily interrupt work,
home life, creativity, dragging "down" the trajectory of biography -- of
course, this in turn is contingent on a number of other circumstances such as
having access to health care, living in a war zone, having another illness
which makes recovery longer.  The chain can be viewed geometrically,  as a
topography emerging from the interplays of these factors.  Many illnesses do
not have such an acute nature; during a long chronic illness there is a
back-and-forth "tugging" across the trajectory of the disease/body and of the
person's biography, within the conditional matrix.  The title of Kathy Charmaz'
<i>Good Days, Bad Days:  Time and Self in Chronic Illness </i>throws this
relation into relief (1991).  A long, slow downswing may only very gradually
affect biography; a brief acute phase, experienced over and over, may be
compensated for by the person's and family's resources, so that the overall
trajectory of the biography remains fairly smooth.  Many possible shapes are
envisioned:  a looping shape in the case of a "comeback" after a serious,
debilitating illness; a very, very gradual progress of the disease which slowly
erodes the biographical trajectory.     <p>
	This model does not seek a Cartesian "mind-body" dualism, but rather to find a
language for the ways in which two (or more) different processes become
inextricably intertwined into one thick chain or braid.  It makes more complex
the sick-well, able-disabled dichotomies, and brings in people's active
conversations with and work with their ill bodies as a central concern. <p>
--------------------------------------------------------------<p>
Insert Figure 1 Here<p>
--------------------------------------------------------------<p>
	The body's trajectory and the self's are bound together, but not completely
tightly coupled.  Careers, plans, work, and relationships may continue in spite
of, around, and through illness; or, a sudden illness may interrupt plans and
biography and reshape the topography.   The background "landscape" is a nested
set of contingent possibilities and structural features which in turn act upon
the shape of the trajectory.  Here, the solid line represents the trajectory of
the body, as it follows up and down the course of a disease and recovery.  The
dotted line represents the person's biography, which is "pulled" and "pushed"
metaphorically by the body, but is not necessarily wholly determined by it
(Corbin &amp; Strauss, 1988; 1991)<p>
	<u>4.1.2 Multiple identities along a body-biography trajectory in sudden
illness or </u>			<u>death</u><p>
<u></u>	Timmermans (in press; 1995), in a dialogue with the Corbin/Strauss BBC
model,  suggests emphasizing multiple identities rather than a single
biographical identity.  He studied more than 100 cases of attempted
resuscitations (CPR) with victims of cardiac arrest, in the emergency rooms of
hospitals.  He attempted to use the trajectory model to explain the sequence
and flow of events as people were brought in by the ambulance crews, "worked
on" by staff, and either declared dead or saved.  (The vast majority of people
die.)  In this extreme case of the interaction between body and biography, he
observed an interested elaboration of the relationship by focusing on the
multiple biographies all people do have.   <p>
	Many have noted that no individual is unitary; we are all multiple selves
(Star, 1991).  Timmermans notes, along these lines, that each patient who
undergoes CPR has multiple intertwining identities outside that of "heart
attach victim," each with its own trajectory. A single patient is at once
father, farmer, church member, student, and president of the Rotary Club.  Each
of those selves has its own trajectory, which while intertwined, are also
historically independent.   During the moments of resuscitation attempt,  these
multiple selves collapse into a single identity: that of the body/machine
(Timmermans, in press).  That is, the nurses and doctors and technicians focus
down, relating only to the body aspect of the person, and collapsing all of the
potential selves and identities of the person into one.  <p>
	After resuscitation (whether or not this is successful) the multiple
identities restart.  The body is again accompanied by the other selves, and the
father, farmer, etc. returns.  On return, each identity will have been
differentially altered by the experience -- perhaps the farmer can no longer
farm -- yet the person is the same person.  In Timmermans' terms, there has
been an isomorphic transformation.<p>
--------------------------------------------------------------<p>
Insert Figure 2 Here<p>
--------------------------------------------------------------<p>
	Timmermans' modifications to the trajectory model in acute, severe illness
(cardiac failure) are pictured above.  Here the biographical trajectories,
selves, move from complex, multiple activity to a single focus:  life-saving.
At death, the identities are restored.  If the patient survives, they are the
same -- but different:  an <i>isomorphic transformation </i> (Timmermans, in
press). <b></b><p>
<b>	</b><u>4.1.3 The twisted landscape:  Adding texture to multiplicity and
standardization</u><p>
<u></u>	In this paper, we have added a third trajectory  dimension to play off
against the interacting trajectories of bodies and multiple identities: the
trajectory of classification systems (as part of infrastructure).  In looking
at an extreme case temporally - where the "time" of the body and of the
multiple identities cannot be aligned with the "time" of the classification
system, we have suggested that the latter gets twisted by the former.  In the
case of TB,  a variety of monstrous classification schemes bubble through the
rift in space/time.  There are mismatches between lived experience and the
rigidities of institutionalized classifications; there are struggles and
negotiations between doctor and patient which are situated and which may seem
erratic. For the patients, they have a chronic illness which necessitates
withdrawal for a prolonged period from "normal life," sequestering with others
with the disease, in an uncertain time frame that is partly dependent on the
ways classification schemes are perceived, negotiated, and used by health
personnel.  As with the models of Corbin, Strauss and Timmermans, our model
draws on a matrix of possibilities for the basis for these negotiations.  These
are culturally and historically specific, and include such factors as how
medical knowledge is represented by public health agencies, how classifications
are modified during the hospital stay, and images from literature, film and
popular science about "what people with tuberculosis are like."   The rich
topography of body and biography intercalates with a
bureaucratic/infrastructural typology (classification scheme). <p>
--------------------------------------------------------------<p>
Insert Figure 3 here<p>
--------------------------------------------------------------<p>
	The twisted landscape of multiple identities and classifications is pictured
above.  In the torqued model, the thick solid line represents the
institutionalized classification schemes; these get modified and "broken" more
slowly than the timeline of the patients' bodies or biographies.  There is
still a body trajectory, indicated by the thinner solid line, which classically
moves up and down over time, during the long course of the disease.  Finally,
after Timmermans, we have multiple biographical trajectories -- patients are
struck with the disease as they are progressing in studies, family raising,
love affairs, careers, and so on.  Unlike the Timmermans model, the long years
passed "out of time" may fracture these identities and transform them beyond
familiarity -- another echo of a "monstrous" or distorted sense of the
disease.<p>
	The topology created by the body-biography trajectory is pulled against the
idealized, standardized typology of the global classification of tuberculosis
-- itself a broken and moving target.<a href="tb_fn.html#fn4">[9]</a>  When
standard classifications are added to the scheme, patients try to fit their
experiences along both body and biographical trajectories to a standard picture
or metric.  changing definitions, local arrangements, and complex relations of
all three trajectories contribute to "torquing"; this may be amplified by
unsuccessful negotiations.<u>Conclusion. Twists and Textures:  Classification
and Lived Experience</u><p>
<b></b><p>
<b></b><i>"Time morality is not cut and dried."</i> (Condon &amp;
Schweingruber, 1994, p. 63 of MS)<p>
<p>
	The information infrastructure that deals with tuberculosis, as with other
diseases, operationalizes a classification system that does not cope well with
the subtleties of biographical time, experience, or negotiations about reality.
It often uses spatial coordinates:   the disease as localized in this body or
not; in this region of the body and no other; it is present among this
population but not that one; the cure can be found in this place but not that
and so forth.  The closest that one gets to the flow of time is the description
active or passive, latent or virulent; occasionally, in links with rough life
stages such as geriatric or pediatric.  But this describes an information
infrastructure dealing with medical knowledge - a knowledge that defines itself
as being true "for all time" about its subject and so able to abstract
contingent historical and biographical flow to uncover the underlying
reality.<p>
	However, there is not just one kind of classification in the world:
classification work is always multiple.  As we get further from medical
knowledge and closer to the suffering patient, time seeps into the
classification systems that get used: how long does Group 1 stay here ? (Roth)
; How may I get reclassified so that I can pass more (or less) time on the
magic mountain? (Mann).   Camille's morality tale unfolds in time in binary
oppositions of good/bad, fit/ill, black/white; promotion or demotion from class
to class in a continually downwards career trajectory.  Tuberculosis is the
archetypal disease of time: chronic, recurrent, progressive.<p>
	So what happens when the disease of time meets the classification of space?
As we have shown, the formal, spatial classification twists.  "Other"
categories run rampant, each seeking a way of expressing the elusive, forbidden
flow of time (words like "quiescent" and "non-active" abound).  A macabre
landscape is born.   And the historiography of the classification system twists
back on itself: in stunning contrast to most medical scientific texts,
tuberculosis classifiers speak of a cyclical flow to their own historical time
(not linear progress).  From the other point of view, that of the patient,
orthogonal classifications are developed that do not even interact with medical
categories ("I have put in my time here, and I am a good person, so I deserve
to be better and to leave.")   The individual's disease is given a temporal
texture at the price of becoming purely local - abstracted <i>away from</i> the
standardized language it becomes once again temporally textured and
immediate.<p>
	This way of framing the problem introduces the idea of <i>texture</i> as an
important one in the representations-work-body-biography literature emerging
from both social studies of science and cultural/historical psychology. Lynch's
work on topical contextures implies a similar direction, we think:  the look
and feel of being in a place and using a genre of representations (1995).  Kari
Thoresen (personal communication), a former geologist,  is developing a model
and vocabulary for different aspects of texture in organizations and
technological networks, examining layers and strata, crystallization processes
(a term also used by Strauss and Timmermans), and other metaphors to examine
how wires, people and bits are put together by a large organization. 	<p>
	Why should social scientists be interested in such twists?  We have suggested
that as we can move on from exploring the seamless web of science and society,
of nature and knowledge to an analysis of the information infrastructure that
acts as matrix for the web.  The web itself is textured in interesting ways by
the available modes of information storage and transfer.  Medical
classification work, typified by the ICD, deals in primarily spatial
compartments; and these compartments cannot hold when biography and duration is
a necessary part of the story.  In general, the information infrastructure
holds certain kinds of knowledge and supports certain varieties of network; and
we believe that it is a task of some urgency for our field to analyze which
kinds of knowledge and network. We have also heard echoes throughout this
research of the ways it is for those living with and researching AIDS (Epstein,
1995), and hope to add to the rich analysis of AIDS, experience, activism and
research currently taking shape in our field. As well, the notion of activity
theoretic spaces with development proceeding dialectically between individual,
community, and the mediations of material artifacts may be augmented by these
notions of texture (cf. Engestr&ouml;m, 1987). The zone of proximal
development, and the contradictions posed by mismatches between individual
experience and institutional mores, may have some of the textural qualities we
discuss here.  Under some conditions (of silence, of denial of experiential
validity, of delayed answers or justice), the sense of torquing could be quite
an important quality.  We need ways to understand experience which seems
monstrous, or out of place, or "queer" (in the negative sense). We are reminded
here of Michel Serres' (1980) invocation of the passage between the natural and
humanistic sciences as indeterminate, twisted, and full of ice floes; of the
images of cyborg and monster pervading feminist theory about technology
(Haraway, 1992; Casper, 1994a, 1994b, 1995). <p>
	Much of our previous work (Bowker &amp; Star, 1991; 1994; Star, 1991) has
concerned itself with the relationship (which we first conceptualized as a kind
of gap) between formal systems of knowledge representation and informal,
experiential, empirical, and situated experience.  Berg (in press) has shown
convincingly that it is never the case of "the map OR the territory," but
always, using the example of medical protocols, "the map IN the territory."
This is a modest attempt to look at one kind of map in a territory marked by
severe biographical interruptions, solitude and aspects of total institutions,
and in dialogue with a compelling infrastructure (both informatic and
managerial).  We see the map-actant in this case as a warping factor, not in
the sense of deviating from any putative norm,  but in the sense of reshaping
and constraining other kinds of experience.<b> </b><u>Note</u><b></b><p>
<b></b>Correspondence regarding this article should be sent to Leigh Star or
Geoffrey C. Bowker, Graduate School of Library and Information Science,
University of Illinois, 501 East Daniel Champaign, IL 61820.  Email:
s-star1@uiuc.edu; bowker@alexia.lis.uiuc.edu.<b></b><p>
<b>References</b><p>
<p>
Bardet, J-P., Bourdelais, P., Guillaume, P., Leburn,  F., &amp;	Qu&eacute;tel,
C. (Eds.) (1988).  	<i>Peurs et terreurs face la contagion</i>. Paris:
Fayard.<p>
Bates, B.  (1992).  <i>Bargaining for life: a social history of tuberculosis,
1876-1938</i>.  	Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania. <p>
Berg, M. (1992). The construction of medical disposals: Medical sociology and
medical 	problem solving in clinical practice. <i>Sociology of health and
illness</i>  <i>14</i>,  151-180.<p>
Berg, M. (in press). <i>Rationalizing medical work:  Decision support
techniques and medical 	practices</i>. Cambridge, MA:  MIT Press.<i></i><p>
<i></i>Berg, M., &amp; Bowker, G. (in press). The multiple bodies of the
medical record. <i>The 	Sociological Quarterly.</i> <i></i><p>
<i></i>Biraben, J-N. (1988).  La tuberculose et la dissimulation des causes de
dec&egrave;s.   In Bardet, 	J-P., Bourdelais, P.,	Guillaume, P., Leburn,  F.,
Qu&eacute;tel, C. (Eds.) <i>Peurs et 	terreurs face &agrave; la contagion.</i>
(pp. 184-198).<i> </i> Paris: Fayard.<p>
Bowker, G. (1994). <i>Science on the run:  Information management and
industrial 	geophysics at Schlumberger, 1920-1940</i>.   Cambridge, MA:  MIT
Press. <p>
Bowker, G., &amp; Star, S.L. (1994).  Knowledge and infrastructure in
international 	information management:  Problems of classification and coding.
In Bud, L. (Ed.) 	<i>Information acumen:  The understanding and use of
knowledge in modern 	business.</i>  (pp. 187-213). London:  Routledge.<p>
Bowker, G., &amp; S. L. Star. (1991).  Situations vs. standards in long-term,
wide-scale 	decision-making:  the case of the international classification of
diseases. In 	<i>Proceedings of the 24th Hawaiian International Conference on
Systems Sciences</i>.  	Vol. IV.  (pp. 73-81). Washington, DC:  IEEE Computer
Society. <p>
Brock, T. D.   (1988).  <i>Robert Koch: A life in medicine and
bacteriology</i>.  Berlin:<p>
	Springer-Verlag.<p>
Casper, M. (1994a). At the margins of humanity: Fetal positions in science and
medicine. <i>Science, technology and human values,</i>  <i>19</i>, 307-323.<p>
Casper, M. (1994b). Reframing and grounding nonhuman agency:  What makes a
fetus an 	agent. <i>American behavioral scientist</i> , <i>37</i>, 839-856.<p>
Casper, M. (1995). Fetal cyborgs and technomoms on the reproductive frontier,
or which 	way to the carnival? In Gray, C. H., Figueroa-Sarriera, H. &amp;
Mentor, S.(Eds.) 	<i>The cyborg handbook</i>.  New York:  Routledge.<p>
Charmaz, K. (1991). <i>Good days, bad days:  The self in chronic illness and
time</i>.  New 	Brunswick, NJ:  Rutgers. <p>
Clarke, A., &amp; Casper, M.  (1996). From simple technology to complex arena:
Classification of pap smears, 1917- 1990.  <i>Medical anthropology
quarterly</i> , <i>10: 	450-475. </i><p>
<i></i>Condon, M. C.,  &amp;  Schweingruber, D.  (1994).  The morality of time
and the 	organization of a men's emergency shelter.  Unpublished manuscript,
Dept. of 	Sociology, University of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign. <p>
Corbin, J.,  &amp; Strauss, A. (1988).  <i>Unending work and care:  Managing
chronic illness 	at home</i>.  San Francisco:  Jossey-Bass.<p>
Corbin, J.,  &amp; Strauss, A. (1991).  Comeback:  The process of overcoming
disability.  In 	Albrecht, G. &amp; Levy, J. (Eds.), <i>Advances in medical
sociology</i>, <i>2</i>, 	137-158.  Greenwich, CT:  JAI Press. <p>
Davis, F. (Ed.) (1963). <i>Passage through crisis:  Polio victims and their
families.  	</i>Indianapolis:   Bobbs-Merrill.<p>
Desrosi&egrave;res, A. (1993).  <i>La raison statistique</i>.   Paris:
D&eacute;couverte.<p>
<i>Diagnostic standards and classification of tuberculosis</i>, (1961 edition),
New York: 	National Tuberculosis Association.<p>
<i>Diagnostic standards and classification of tuberculosis</i>, (1955 edition),
New York: 	National Tuberculosis Association. <p>
Engestr&ouml;m, Y. (1987).  <i>Learning by expanding:  An activity-theoretical
approach to 	developmental research.</i>  Helsinki:  Orienta-Konsultit Oy. <p>
Epstein, S.  (1995). The construction of lay expertise:  AIDS activism and the
forging of 	credibility in the reform of clinical trials, <i>Science,
technology and human values</i> ,	<i>20</i>,  408-437.<p>
Fagot-Largeault, A. (1989)<i>. Causes de la mort : histoire naturelle et
facteurs de risque</i>.<p>
	Paris : Librairie  philosophique J. Vrin.<p>
Glaser, B., &amp; Strauss, A. (1965). <i>Time for dying.</i>  Chicago:
Aldine.<p>
Hacking, I.(1990) <i>The taming of chance</i>. Cambridge: Cambridge University
Press.<p>
Hacking, I. (1995) <i>Rewriting the soul:  Multiple personality and the
sciences of memory.</i>  			Princeton, NJ:  Princeton University Press. <p>
Haraway, D. (1992).   The promises of monsters:  A regenerative politics for
inappropriate/d others. In  L. Grossberg, C. Nelson, &amp; P. Treichler,
(Eds.),   			<i>Cultural studies now and in the future</i>, pp. 295-337.
London:  Routledge. <p>
Kingsland, L. C. III, (Ed.)  (1989).  <i>Proceedings of the thirteenth  annual
symposium on 	computer applications in medical care</i>, November 5-8.
Washington DC, IEEE 	Computer Society Press. <p>
Latour, B. (1993) <i>We have never been modern</i>. Trans. Catherine Porter.
Cambridge, MA: 	Harvard University Press.<p>
Lynch, M. (1995) Laboratory space and the technological complex:  An
investigation of 	topical contextures.  In Star, S. L. (Ed.) (Pp. 226-256).
<i>Ecologies of knowledge:  	work and politics in science and technology</i>.
Albany, NY:  SUNY Press.<p>
Mann, T.  (1992 [1929]). <i>The magic mountain</i>. Trans. Lowe-Porter, H-T.
New York:  	Modern Library.<p>
Pasveer, B. (1989). Knowledge of shadows: the introduction of X-ray images in
medicine, 	<i>Sociology of health and illness, 11, </i>360-383. <p>
Porter, R. (1990).  <i>English society in the eighteenth century</i>. London:
Penguin.<p>
Roth, J. A.  (1963).  <i>Timetables:  Structuring the passage of time in
hospital treatment and 	other careers</i>.  Indianapolis:  Bobbs-Merrill. <p>
Roy, D. (1959).   "Banana time":  Job satisfaction and informal interaction.
<i>Human 	organization</i>  18:158-68.<p>
Serres, M.  (1980).  <i>Le Passage du nord-ouest</i>.  Paris : Editions de
Minuit.<p>
Sontag, S. (1977). <i>Illness as metaphor</i>. New York:  Farrar, Straus &amp;
Giroux.<p>
Star, S. L. (Ed.)  (1995). <i>Ecologies of knowledge:  Work and politics in
science and 	technology. </i>  	Albany, NY:  SUNY Press. <p>
Star, S. L. (1991). Power, technologies and the phenomenology of standards:  On
being 	allergic to onions.  In Law, J. (Ed.) (Pp. 27-57). <i>A sociology of
monsters?  	Power, technology  and the modern world,    </i>Sociological Review
Monograph.  	No. 38. Oxford:  Basil Blackwell.<p>
Star, S. L. (1989).  <i>Regions of the mind:  Brain research and the quest for
scientific 	certainty.  </i>  Stanford:  Stanford University Press. <p>
Star, S. L., &amp; Ruhleder, K. (1996).  Steps toward an ecology of
infrastructure:  	problems of design and access in large-scale information
systems.<i>  Information 	systems research.</i> 7: 111-134.<p>
Strauss, A. (1993). <i>Continual permutations of action.   </i> New York:
Aldine de 	Gruyter.<p>
Timmermans, S.  (in press).   Saving lives or identities?  The double dynamic
of 	technoscientific scripts.  <i>Social Studies of Science</i>.<p>
Timmermans, S. (1995). Saving lives?  A historical and ethnographic study of
resuscitation techniques.  Ph.D. Dissertation, Department of Sociology,
University 	of Illinois, Urbana-Champaign.<p>
Timmermans, S., Bowker, G. &amp; Star, S.L. (1995).  Infrastructure and
organizational 	transformation:  Classifying nurses' work. In W. Orlikowski, G.
Walsham, M. 	Jones &amp; J. DeGross (Eds.), <i>Information technology and
changes in organizational 	work</i>.. <i>Proceedings </i> IFIP WG8.2
Conference, Cambridge, England, pp. 344-370. 	London:  Chapman and Hall.<p>
Timmermans, S., &amp; Berg, M. (in press). Standardisation in action:
Achieving 	universalism and localisation in medical protocols. <i>Social
Studies of Science.</i> <p>
</body></html>
